The Stars in Secret Influence


1. Paloma

The darkness was sudden and all-encompassing. I felt smooth, uneven stone pressing at my cheek. My head spun as if I’d fallen from a great height, yet I couldn’t quite tell how long I’d lain sprawled on the floor of this pitch-black room.
Snatches of chatter—which my mind had only vaguely registered before—abruptly ceased, leaving the room very silent. I brought myself onto my hands and knees, then slowly to a standing position—a difficult feat when I couldn’t see my body below me.
“Hello?” I called, and my voice echoed around the chamber.
Seconds passed. Then: “Hi.”
The acknowledgement was somewhat reassuring. “Where am I?”
“Somewhere you’re not supposed to be,” came the cryptic answer.
There was a shifting noise, the unmistakable sound of chairs being pulled away and then pushed back in, as if a few people were standing up from a table. There were some more whispers. Then a couple pairs of footsteps rang out, slowly getting softer and then disappearing.
“You still there?” I asked when the noise had subsided.
“Just me,” said the voice from before.
“Can you turn on the lights?”
“I probably shouldn’t.”
“Why not?”
“The less you know, the better.”
“Well, it’s pretty dark—”
“There is no darkness but ignorance,” sang the voice. “Sorry. That’s a Shakespeare quote. Thought it would be appropriate.”
Okay then. “Can you at least, uh, help me get back to where I was before? I left my camera on the hill and I don’t want it to get damaged.”
“I can’t do that yet,” said the voice, closer this time. My eyes had adjusted somewhat to the darkness, and I thought I saw the shadow of a figure before me. “I’ll send some people later to retrieve your camera. …So you don’t know how you got here?”
“Nope.”
“Good.” There was a pause. “Are you scared?”
“Only a little bit.”
“That’s good too. It’ll make everything easier.”
I heard the sound of a door sliding open, and a few more whispers. Then the voice called back to me, farther away again.
“Okay, I need to turn on the lights now. Promise you won’t freak out? Everything’s going to be perfectly fine. We’re not going to hurt you.”
“I don’t freak out easily,” I replied, suddenly quite a bit more nervous than before.
“Very good,” the voice said, and they turned the lights on.

2. Micah

Synecdoche Labs was located on the top floor of a building in San Francisco, squeezed in between a Starbucks and some old publishing company. Typical Silicon Valley start-up, to my eyes. Part of me hoped that this one would be different from the numerous ones I’d visited before.
I was greeted at the door by a woman who looked to have been waiting for me. She was wearing a button-down shirt and bow tie, leaning casually against the door in a strikingly unprofessional way. She had warm brown skin and black hair, dyed red at the tips. Her eyebrows lifted, and she straightened up when she saw me.
“Are you the inspector?” she asked.
“Compliance officer,” I corrected.
“Right.” She grinned, stepping forward to grasp my hand in hers. Her grip was firm and confident. “Welcome. I’m Lakshmi Patil. Nice to meet you.”
“Micah Roth,” I responded. The courtesies were nice, but not what I was here for. “So, um, Ms Patil—”
“Lakshmi.”
“What—?”
“Call me Lakshmi.”
“Oh, well—” I tried again, tripping over my words. “Lakshmi, then. Well. Anyway. May I meet the owner of your start-up?”
Lakshmi’s grin widened, and she spread her arms in a vaguely smug manner. “You’re looking at her.”
“Oh.” I likely reddened. “I—well, in that case—”
“Why don’t we go inside?” she interrupted, pointing a thumb at the door behind her.
The room within was a mess. Different types of wires littered the floor, coiled up in piles or snaking across the room to connect pieces of machinery. Papers were strewn over the tables and desks, and there were more books stacked in piles about the room than there were on the bookshelf. And of course, computers were everywhere—some on desks, some on the floor. One was on its side. There was a kind of frantic quality to the space, as if someone had rushed in trying to clean it, but only succeeded in making it more messy.
Other than Lakshmi, there were only two other people in the room. One was a blonde man in a t-shirt, perched on a chair to my left, buried in a copy of Shakespeare’s sonnets. The other was crouched in a corner, arms hugging his knees to his chest. His head was down, and I could see nothing of his face, only curly black hair.
“This… is your office?” I finally inquired of Lakshmi.
“Sort of,” she replied, but didn’t elaborate.
“Are you going to introduce me to your… coworkers?”
Lakshmi gestured vaguely to the man reading Shakespeare, then the one huddled on the floor. “That’s Caerwyn, and that’s Isaac. I don’t think either particularly want to be disturbed at the moment.”
“Is there anyone else?”
“Yeah… they’re just not here right now, though.”
“Is that the government tech person?” Caerwyn briefly poked his head up from his book to regard me with curiosity, and perhaps a little anxiety. He had a strong accent that I couldn’t quite place—something European?
“I suppose you could say that,” I replied.
“Cool.” Caerwyn offered no further discourse, simply fixed his eyes back on the book.
“So.” Lakshmi clapped her hands together. “Let’s get down to business, shall we? What kind of inspection are you supposed to be conducting?”
If Lakshmi had read my emails—and I knew she had—she should know. But I sighed and launched into my usual spiel. “The government has imposed specific restrictions on companies utilizing certain technologies. For example, Synecdoche Labs is an AI start-up. We don’t want any of your creations going rogue or anything—not that they would, of course.” I paused. “But, well, I’m supposed to check just in case. Make sure you don’t have any illegal software, and comply with all the code… that kind of thing.”
A second passed. Lakshmi’s eyebrows were furrowed slightly. “And this is your job?”
“Pretty much, yeah.”
“Does it ever become boring?”
That was not the question I was expecting. “Well, I mean… I haven’t caught many people using illegal technology. Nothing more exciting than pirated software and the occasional virus. But, you know. Someone’s gotta do it.”
Lakshmi did not seem satisfied by the answer, but nodded all the same. “All right. So what do you have to do?”
“Not much. I’ve got equipment in my van. I just have to scan the building and your computers—then, if everything goes well, I’ll write you a formal ‘This technology approved by a US Compliance Officer’ statement thing.”
She nodded slowly. “Okay. Need any help getting things from your car?”

3. Trochee

“A compliance officer!” I hissed excitedly into the audio comm.
“A what??” came Spond’s voice from the other end. “Why didn’t I hear about this? Where are you?”
“We’re at the office.”
“Trochee, you’ve gotta give me more information. Where are you?”
“In the secret room. I’m watching from the security camera!”
“I—you’re sure you’ve taken the necessary precautions?”
“Well, Lakshmi said we—”
I swear I could hear Spond rolling his eyes from the other side of the comm. “Listen to me, Trochee. I need more information. Who is this person? What is a ‘compliance officer’?”
“Well, I think they’re from the government.”
“Okay. That’s a start. Tell me more. What’s their job?”
“They’re making sure we don’t have any illegal technology.”
A dry laugh from the comm. “Hmm. Illegal technology. Gosh, that’s a tricky one. Is wormhole tracking technology illegal, do you suppose?”
“Um, yeah, I think so.”
“That was sarcasm. Anyway. Where’s Isaac?”
“Sleeping in the main room—”
“Sleeping??” shouted Spond. “What the hell does Lakshmi think she’s doing?”
“Well, maybe she has the situation under control.”
Spond swore. “You know what, just tell me the name of this officer person. I’ll look them up myself.”
I tried to recall what the person had called themself. “Micah, I think? Micah Roth?”
“Okay. Good. Thank you.” I heard the sound of typing through the comm.
On the monitor before me, the door opened. I jumped, again focusing my eyes on the screen. Lakshmi and Micah reentered with a couple of bags. As I watched, Micah started to unpack them, revealing a laptop and a couple devices that I didn’t recognize.
“By the way,” I told Spond suddenly, studying the people on the monitor, “I think this Micah person is augmented in some way.”
That got his attention. “Augmented?? What do you mean?”
“Well, they’ve got this thing on their legs—”
“That tells me nothing. Be specific. What kind of thing? Pants?”
“No, it’s like a tech thing. On their head too.”
“Trochee, you are being extremely unhelpful. Just send me a picture.”
I snapped a picture of the screen and sent it to Spond. Apart from their light brown hair and pale skin, Micah was unlike many people I’d seen before. For one thing, it was difficult to tell what gender they were—Micah fit none of the stereotypes. They also had some sort of device attached to their legs and hips that fit tightly around the appendages, almost like an exoskeleton. Furthermore, a patch of their hair was shaved to reveal a small cybernetic implant at the top of their head.
“Did you get the picture?” I asked Spond. “Why do you think this Micah is a cyborg? Maybe they’re stronger than the others! Or maybe they can connect to computers through their brain—”
Spond’s laugh cut me off. “Trochee! This isn’t a form of human augmentation; it’s a common technology used to compensate for loss of motor skills!”
“What—?”
A loud sigh. “Micah can’t use their legs. Ergo, they’ve got this exoskeleton that they can control with their brain. Does that make any sense at all?”
“Well, yeah, kind of—”
“Anyway,” Spond interrupted, “this is all besides the point. What’s happening in the office now?”
I quickly looked back at the monitor. “Um… well, nothing interesting. Micah’s doing something on their laptop. Lakshmi is watching. Caerwyn is reading. Isaac is still asleep.”
“Can’t you get them to wake Isaac up or something?”
“Why?”
“He needs to get out of there,” growled Spond. “Can you wake him up remotely or something?”
I shrugged, before realizing that Spond couldn’t see me. “Um—I don’t know. I don’t think so. I don’t really have connection with anyone else in the office.”
Spond made a discontented noise. “Alright. Just tell me what’s going on, okay? We can figure it out from there.”

4. Lakshmi

“So….” I searched for a small talk topic. “What are your pronouns?”
Micah whipped around, the only time in the past ten minutes that their gaze had strayed from their laptop. “Oh! Um. Thanks for asking. People don’t usually ask. I use they/them. What about you?”
I smiled, glad I’d made the right assumption. “She/her. No problem.”
Micah nodded distractedly, again turning to stare at the computer screen. From what I could tell, all of the scans had been turning out normal. That was a good sign. I’d prepared well.
A few minutes later, Micah turned to me again. “Your coworker over there in the corner. Isaac. Is he alright?”
I swallowed. I’d been hoping Micah wouldn’t ask. “Yeah, yeah, he’s fine. Just sleeping. He does that a lot.”
“If you don’t mind me saying, your coworkers don’t really seem to be… well… working.”
I glanced over at Caerwyn, who was still absorbed in the sonnets, effectively ignoring us. “Yeah. They’re… on break right now, I guess?”
Micah chuckled. “You have a bit of an unusual company.”
“Believe me, I know.”
The laptop beeped, and fear gripped me for a second before I realized that the sound was simply indicating the completion of one of Micah’s tests.
“How much longer will this take?” I asked, hopefully concealing the apprehension in my voice.
“Not too long.” Micah pulled out the cord that connected their laptop to one of ours. “Good news—none of your computers have any viruses or illegal software!”
“That’s nice to hear.”
Micah reached into their bag, pulling out a roughly spherical device. They opened a hatch in the bottom, drawing out three tripod-like legs, and set the mechanism in the center of the room. My stomach clenched.
“What’s that?” I asked, knowing perfectly well what it was.
“It’s another type of scanner. I input the parameters of the building, and it—well, it surveys it. Sort of. Checks for odd radiation, emissions, signatures, that kind of thing. Um. Basically builds up a portrait of what kinds of technology are present.”
The explanation wasn’t perfect, but it was enough to confirm my fear. “Your email didn’t mention you were going to sweep the entire building…?”
Micah shrugged, plugging the scanner into their laptop. “Yeah… we’re purposefully vague. Don’t worry; this should only take a couple minutes.”

5. Micah

The last thing I expected from the sweep was a spike in the building’s radiation levels. Granted, I’d seen things like this before—chemistry labs, for example, often had some sort of radioactive substance. But an AI start-up? Radioactivity?
And that was just the beginning. Two minutes into the sweep, the numbers on the laptop readout began to go wild. I didn’t even know what half the words meant. What the hell were inverterons? Why were there high levels of toxic substances within the building?
And then, of course, why did Lakshmi look absolutely terrified?
“Care to explain?” I asked after a moment.
Lakshmi exchanged a glance with Caerwyn, who had finally put away his book. Neither spoke.
“You told us it’d work,” said Caerwyn after a second.
“I thought it would,” Lakshmi murmured in response. “I didn’t know they would sweep the building with such a high-tech device.”
“Did the field hold?”
“Not at all.”
“Lakshmi.” I began again, an edge to my voice. “I’ve never gotten readings like this before. I need you to explain.”
Lakshmi shrugged, a gesture seeming to signal defeat. “What can I say? We’re harboring a shit ton of illegal technology. Your sweep confirmed that. I suppose you’re going to file a report to the government, now, or something like that?”
“Something like that,” I confirmed. The whole ordeal was incredibly strange. As much as I wanted to file a report and let the professionals do the work, I was also incredibly curious.
“Wait.” Caerwyn stood suddenly, fixing his green eyes on me with a look of determination. “Just one second. Before you file that report of yours—hear us out. And then you can do whatever you like. Deal?”
I glanced at Lakshmi. She nodded slowly.
“Alright,” I replied. “Tell me.”

6. Melissa

I have taken extensive notes on the wormhole at the top of Kramer Hill. First of all, I know that it appears—or perhaps the correct word is opens—once every 5.3 hours, for 34 seconds. I don’t know where it goes—it could potentially lead anywhere in space and time!
Occasionally I’ll throw a rock through it. Perhaps one day I’ll be able to buy some sort of probe to toss through. That would be fascinating.
I don’t think anyone else has noticed the wormhole. First of all, not many people visit Kramer Hill. It’s surrounded by trees on all sides, and a five-minute walk on a hiking trail is the only reliable way to get there.
Second, the wormhole is not very visible. When it opens, it’s approximately three feet in diameter. It’s spherical, and seems to reflect light in odd ways. If you weren’t looking for it, you’d just think you were seeing things. It’s almost like a distorted mirror in that way. If I had the proper software, it would be cool to run some sort of simulation.
When it’s gone, it’s gone. I could wave a hand through the place where it was and nothing would happen to it. This all has to do with the nature of wormholes, of course. They’re essentially rips in spacetime. Sometimes spacetime—that’s the four-dimensional fabric of the universe—folds in odd ways that are hard to wrap your mind around. When two separate points in spacetime chance to overlap, a wormhole appears. Sometimes they’re unstable, or one-sided. It’s all very complicated. But I think the wormhole on Kramer Hill is stable. It hasn’t become a black hole or anything, which is good.
I discovered the wormhole three months ago. I brought my telescope to the hill because it’s a very good place for observing the stars. I love space. It’s awesome. While adjusting my telescope, I happened to look in the right place at the right time.
I haven’t yet told anyone about the wormhole, but I don’t doubt someone knows already. This probably isn’t the only one. There may be tons of them, just waiting to be discovered.
I do have one slight lead, however. About a week ago, a man came to the hill at the same time the wormhole was open. I didn’t see what he was doing, because I freaked out and ran away, which I obviously regret now. However, I did manage to get a picture of him, so I looked him up. His name is Trochee Davis, and he works at an artificial intelligence startup called Synecdoche Labs, run by a woman called Lakshmi Patil. There’s not a lot of other information about him. I wonder what culture his name is from. It sounds Greek.
Perhaps he’ll come to Kramer Hill again sometime, and we could talk. Or maybe I could go to Synecdoche Labs and meet him. I’m not sure if I’d be brave enough to do either, though. Social interactions are often kind of scary. But I will keep observing the wormhole. Who knows—maybe someday, something will come out of it.

7. Isaac

I wake up. I sit up, look at the people above me. Lakshmi is here. She isn’t smiling today. Caerwyn is behind her. He isn’t reading like normal. Trochee and Spond are not here. I wonder where they are. Perhaps they are in the other room.
There is a new person standing in front of me. They are human. I quickly look them up. Their name is Micah Roth. They are a compliance officer.
Lakshmi speaks. I can’t hear. My hearing isn’t turned on yet. She realises this, and turns it on.
“He’s our experiment,” Lakshmi says.
Micah comes closer to me, studying me. “Amazing,” they say. “So this is what you’ve been building?”
“Yeah,” Lakshmi responds. “Your sweep probably detected some of his technology. It’s pretty advanced.”
Micah kneels down until they are at eye level with me. I watch them. They say, “Can you hear me, Isaac?”
“Yes,” I reply.
They smile suddenly, and ask, “Are you named after Isaac Asimov?”
“I am.”
“You’re a very realistic android.”
“Thank you,” I say, because I think they mean it as a compliment.
Micah stands, and turns back to Lakshmi. “How long did it take to build him?”
Lakshmi looks uncomfortable. I don’t know how much Micah knows about the technology that Trochee and Spond provided us. Perhaps they know nothing. Although, I think it would make more sense to explain that before explaining my existence.
Finally, Lakshmi says, “We didn’t completely build him.”
Micah frowns. “What do you mean?”
“I may be a scientist, but I could never make an android like Isaac by myself.”
“What about Caerwyn?”
“I don’t know much about computer science,” Caerwyn tells them.
“So who built him?”
Lakshmi and Caerwyn look at each other for a second. They are presumably thinking about the pact. Again, I wonder where Trochee and Spond are.
“Should I go get Trochee?” Caerwyn asks, echoing my thoughts.
Lakshmi nods, and Caerwyn leaves. Then Lakshmi walks up to me.
“I’m going to turn you off now,” she tells me.
“Okay,” I say.
I go to sleep.

8. Spond

I couldn’t believe Lakshmi didn’t tell me about the inspection from a government compliance officer. I mean—it definitely sounded like something I should know about. Perhaps I could’ve done something to help the situation. At least, I could’ve been a lot more help than Trochee.
“Why was I never informed of this plan??” I demanded of Trochee for at least the fifth time.
“Well, you’ve been at the shed!” he replied, voice crackling through the comm. “I don’t suppose you could’ve been of any help.”
“Dammit, Trochee, you could have at least let me know—!”
“I didn’t know about this until yesterday,” he protested. “Really. Only Lakshmi got the email. None of us knew this was going to happen. We had to completely lock down the secret room this morning. It was stressful.”
I took a deep breath, slowly let it out. “Alright. Okay. Forget it. But look—now Micah knows what’s up. Lakshmi’s probably gonna tell them everything. What do I tell everyone?? This all has to stay secret!”
“I know! Believe me. But—but I think Lakshmi’s gonna figure it out. She’s got a plan.”
“She had better.”
“I think—oh, wait.” There was a shuffling on the other side of the comm. I heard muffled voices. My heartbeat quickened.
“Trochee? What’s going on?”
“Caerwyn’s here,” came Trochee’s voice. “He… um… he says I should come down. I don’t know.”
“Wait, what?? Did you fix your—Trochee? Trochee!!”
There was silence at the end of the comm. I heard the sound of a door shutting—then static.
I waited for a couple seconds, then shut down the comm. I was completely cut off.
The next opening was in two hours. This time I’d be ready.

9. Trochee

Just as they had appeared on the monitor, when I entered the room, Lakshmi and Micah were standing, waiting for me. Isaac was asleep in the corner. I took a deep breath, and forced a smile, trying to pretend my heart wasn’t beating much faster than it should be.
“Hello,” I squeaked. “You’re Micah?”
“Yeah,” they replied, brow furrowing. “How did you…?”
“I’ve been watching you on the monitor,” I replied, jerking a thumb in the direction of the secret room. When met with a blank stare, I sheepishly clarified. “Um. Well. There’s a security camera. I was watching it.”
“Ah,” Micah responded. “And I’ve heard your name is Trochee?”
“Yep.”
“Isn’t that a poetry thing?”
“It’s, uh, my nickname.”
There was an awkward silence. I glanced at Lakshmi, willing her to explain. If she did the talking, then perhaps Micah wouldn’t question me about the particulars of the pact—
“Trochee—and his friend Spond—they’re our technology suppliers.”
“Well, we don’t really supply much technology anymore,” I hastily clarified. “We just help with the exploration and stuff. And we helped make Isaac. That sort of stuff, you know?”
“Your tech is pretty advanced,” said Micah, eyebrows raising slightly.
Oh no.
“You may be wondering,” Lakshmi cut in, saving me, “where they get this extremely advanced tech. And we regret to inform you that that information is classified.”
I let out a tiny sigh of relief, which hopefully Micah didn’t notice. Classified was quite a good way to put it—cleverly leaving out the fact that Lakshmi herself didn’t know where the tech came from. That was the pact. Spond and I supplied the technology, on the grounds that Lakshmi and Caerwyn never tried to trace its origin.
“Anyway,” continued Lakshmi, “Trochee will be happy to answer any questions you have about the technology itself.”
“Except where it comes from,” I added. Hopefully my voiced masked my apprehension at explaining the secrets of Synecdoche to an almost total stranger.
She laughed. “Except where it comes from.”
But fortunately, Micah’s thoughts seemed to have strayed to another topic. “Why did you make Isaac?”
Oh. Well, that question led to a completely different can of worms.
“Uh, we didn’t plan to make him sentient at first,” I began. “Or humanoid even. But it turned out that he aroused quite a lot of suspicion if he didn’t look exactly like a human—”
Lakshmi opened her mouth to add on, but was cut off when a shrill beep sounded through the room. It looked to be coming from the computer on the desk. Lakshmi’s eyes widened, and she ran over, surveying the screen.
“What’s going on?” Micah voiced the exact question I think we’d all been wondering.
“There’s some abnormal activity from the Kramer Hill wormhole,” Lakshmi muttered, and my entire body froze. “It’s—hang on. Caerwyn, will you get over there and check it out?”
Caerwyn, who had previously been sitting in silence in the corner, stood. “Yeah. Can I take the van?”
“Um, maybe I should go?” I tried to keep the fear out of my voice.
Lakshmi laughed. “It’s not your wormhole, Trochee. Let someone else check up on it for once.”
“Yeah, I’ve never even seen it,” said Caerwyn, already making towards the door. “Gotta be exciting, huh?”
What could I say? I didn’t have any good excuses. But by the time my frantic brain had fabricated something, Caerwyn was gone. There was a pause.
Then Micah, who I had completely forgot about in my sudden anxiety, turned on Lakshmi, eyes wide and looking even more incredulous than before.
“You never said anything about wormholes??”

10. Melissa

The first thing I noticed when I got to Kramer Hill was that the wormhole was there. It wasn’t supposed to be there. According to my watch, it wasn’t supposed to open for another two minutes.
And when I got closer, there was something different about the wormhole’s appearance as well. It looked like it was glowing—but in the daylight, I couldn’t really be sure. How long had it been open like this?
Then suddenly, the wormhole seemed to shift. I stiffened, sure I had imagined it—but no, the sphere was actually distorting, twisting into more oval-like shapes. I whipped out my phone, training the camera on the wormhole, which appeared to be growing in size. Within a matter of seconds, it had to be about five feet tall, now a slender ovoid shape instead of a sphere.
As I watched, the ovoid flexed and darkened, as though reflecting something on the other side. The shape within the wormhole became more prominent, molding itself into what seemed to be a humanoid. I stepped back.
It all happened so fast. There was a flash of light—then the wormhole was back to its original shape and a person was standing before me. I dropped my phone and jumped away, but lost my footing and fell into a bush. Quickly, I scrambled up again, grabbing my phone and brushing off the leaves. Then I fixed my eyes upon the figure who had emerged out of the wormhole.
She was a woman, about my age, dressed in a plain black t-shirt and pants. Her hair was a muted orange-brown color, falling down past her shoulders. Her skin was tan but not as dark as mine, and she had a couple freckles dotting her face. She was smiling.
“Who are you?” was the first thing she asked. Her voice was low in pitch, but very smooth.
I swallowed nervously. “Um. Hi. I’m Mel. Or Melissa. Take your pick. You?”
“Paloma.” She extended her hand, but I didn’t take it. Hand-shaking was not one of my favorite activities.
“You came out of a wormhole,” I said. The statement was fairly obvious, but what else could I say?
“I did.” Paloma’s sustained eye contact was somehow more uncomfortable than usual. I focused my gaze upon her freckles instead.
“Where—where does the wormhole lead?”
“Why do you want to know?” was her cryptic reply.
I took another step backwards, fingering the hem of my shirt. I didn’t know how to reply. What would I say? How would I explain my obsession with this wormhole? Paloma stayed absolutely still, face still twisted into that serene smile that I couldn’t read.
“I like wormholes,” I finally said. A massive understatement.
“How did you know it was a wormhole?”
“It… looks like a wormhole. I know what wormholes look like.”
“Have you ever seen one before?”
“Um—well. In science fiction movies. And science documentaries.” I didn’t mention the enormous amount of research I’d conducted to make sure it really was a wormhole.
“I—I see.” Paloma’s face fell suddenly. At first I assumed it was a reaction to my words, but then she doubled over, almost as if in pain. “I’m sorry. I need to… need to….”
And just like that, like a marionette with its strings clipped, she collapsed. I rushed forward, crouching down and pressing two fingers to her neck. Her skin was very cold. Fortunately, I could feel the steady pulse of a heartbeat.
I closed my eyes, trying to still my own wildly beating heart. Here was a woman who had walked out of a wormhole, then suddenly, inexplicably, fainted. What was I supposed to do??
I heard the rustle of leaves behind me, easily identifiable as footsteps to my hyper-attentive ear. I whipped around. The man, to whom the footsteps had belonged, froze. He had a mass of neat, thick, blonde hair, very pale skin, and was dressed in a t-shirt and jeans. His eyes flickered from me, to Paloma on the ground, to the wormhole.
“What the hell happened here??” he finally cried.

11. Caerwyn

I was pretty sure no one else knew about the wormhole—other than me, Lakshmi, Trochee, and Spond. But here were two women who I didn’t know at all, right next to an open wormhole. One of them was sprawled on the ground—she had long, unkempt red hair and fair skin, and was dressed in all black. The other was crouched over her, a shorter woman in a jacket, with darker tan skin, glasses, and black hair in twists. She looked absolutely terrified.
“The wormhole got bigger, and she came out,” she whispered, gesturing at the woman on the ground.
I ran up to the two of them. “Is she okay?”
“She has a pulse.”
“Well, that’s a good start.”
“You know about the wormhole?” was her response.
I nodded distractedly. “Yeah. Yeah. One of my friends, he discovered it a while ago. I’ve actually never seen this one before.” And, more importantly, no one but us had ever come out of a wormhole before.
Lakshmi would want to hear about this. But as I reached in my pocket for my phone, I realized that, in my haste, I’d forgotten it. I cursed under my breath.
“Hey, uh, can I use your phone?” I asked the woman beside me.
She eyed me warily. “Why?”
“I need to contact my friend who works with me.”
“Coworker?”
“Yeah.”
She wordlessly handed me her phone. I took it, typing in Lakshmi’s comm number. But when I hit enter, a mechanical voice informed me, “Lakshmi Patil does not accept comms from people who are not in her contacts.”
I sighed loudly, handing the woman’s phone to her. “Well. I guess I’ll talk to her when I get back.” For now, I supposed I should investigate the situation a bit more. “So, how do you know about the wormhole?”
“I’ve been studying it,” was her somewhat surprising answer.
“Studying it! What do you mean?”
“Well, I, I know when it opens, and how long it’s open for, and all that.” Her eyes darted between the unconscious woman, the wormhole, and my shoes, never once making eye contact. “General things like that. I don’t know where it leads, though.”
I took a deep breath. “Okay. I trust you haven’t told anyone about it?”
“Of course not,” she replied.
“Right. Good.” I crouched down beside her. “Hey, let’s back up a little. I’m Caerwyn. What about you?”
“Are you Welsh?” was her unexpected query.
“Um—yes, but I don’t think that’s relevant—”
“It’s just that I recognized your accent. And your name sounds Welsh. Um. Anyway, I’m Melissa.”
“And this is…?” I pointed to the other woman.
“Paloma. She came out of the wormhole.”
“Ah, yeah, you mentioned. How come she’s… y’know….” I gesticulated aimlessly, trying to remember the word. “Asleep? No, that’s the wrong—”
“She’s not asleep. She fainted.”
“I know! What’s the other word—”
“Unconscious?”
“Yes!” I clapped my hands in triumph. “Sorry, English is not my first language.”
“Me neither.”
“Really! You don’t have an accent. What’s your first language, then?”
“Spanish. I was raised bilingual, actually. And I assume yours is Welsh?”
“Correct. But. Anyway. Unconscious. She’s unconscious. Why?”
“I don’t know,” was Melissa’s somewhat disappointing response. “I think it has something to do with whatever’s on the other side of the wormhole. Do you know where it leads?”
“Somewhat,” I replied. “Never been through it, though—”
“Where?”
“Antarctica, apparently.” Yet Paloma showed no signs of having been in the freezing cold.
“Apparently?”
“My friend Trochee said that.”
“Could your friend Trochee be mistaken?”
“I mean—I guess he could—”
“I don’t think she was just in Antarctica.”
“Right. But Trochee entered all the data into the official map thing—you’re only supposed to enter values that you’ve at least double checked.”
A pause. Melissa furrowed her brow. “Could he be lying?”
“I’m not sure why he would lie.” My gaze travelled from Melissa’s face to the wormhole, and a different thought popped into my head. “Hang on a sec—isn’t this one the wormhole that opens for like a minute and then closes?”
“34 seconds.”
“Yeah. That. The question is, why is it still open?”
There was a pause. Then Melissa said quietly, “Maybe someone on the other side is holding it open.”

12. Micah

“Wormholes,” I prompted again. “Tell me. Wormholes are a thing now??”
“They’ve always been a thing,” responded Lakshmi, skirting around the question. “Just… most people don’t notice them.”
“Okay, but why are you noticing them? You’ve obviously been tracking at least one of them. Does this have anything to do with your android, or—”
“Maybe we should show them the map,” Trochee piped up behind me. I couldn’t help but smile internally at the correct pronoun usage.
“Maybe that’s a good idea,” Lakshmi said after a short pause. She crossed the room to stand in front of Isaac, taking out the device with which she had controlled him before.
There was a click, and Isaac’s head jerked up to survey Lakshmi, Trochee, and I with the same blank stare as before.
“Hey Isaac, could you show Micah the map?” Lakshmi requested.
“Of course.”
Isaac stood, walked to the shelf, where he took down a device that looked somewhat like a holographic projector—a dome-shaped apparatus about the size of a soccer ball—but not a model I’d ever encountered. There was something very uncanny about Isaac’s movements: I could have easily mistaken him for a human, but there was still a smooth, unearthly quality about him. Maybe it was the way that he never made any unnecessary movements. Trochee, on the other hand, was fidgeting with the hem of his jacket.
The three of us watched as Isaac took some cables, plugging one end into the projector and the other into a port on his forearm. Then he locked eyes with Lakshmi.
“Should I turn it on?”
“Go ahead.”
Isaac flipped a switch, and the projector came to life, displaying a 3D image of the Earth, hovering before us. The hologram was a transparent blue, not unlike those you might see in Star Wars or some other science fiction movie. Even so, the image was much clearer than that of most projectors. Perhaps this device was one of Trochee’s?
“What exactly am I looking at?” I asked, eyes scanning the 3D Earth before me. Other than bright dots placed at various locations, the globe looked relatively normal.
“This is a map of all the wormholes we’ve encountered.” Lakshmi indicated the dots. “Isaac, zoom into California.”
The globe distorted, suddenly displaying a more 2D image of only California. There were five dots—three clustered around the Bay Area, and two further out.
“We’re here.” Lakshmi pointed to San Francisco. “The most readily available wormhole is just down the street, here.” She indicated one of the lights. “Then Kramer Hill is a little bit south, about a ten-minute journey from here, and there’s one in a Taco Bell parking lot in Oakland.”
“Why so many in one place?” The dots on the Earth map had not seemed particularly random—there were lots in North America and Europe, but fewer in Asia or South America and almost none in Africa.
“This is just the wormholes we’ve discovered. There are probably tons more, but these are the ones we’ve actually tracked down and know where they lead.”
Isaac had switched the hologram back to the globe view. I peered at it. “Wow. That’s a lot.”
“We have a lot of time,” Lakshmi replied.
“So you’ve been to all of these places?”
“Yup.”
“And how do you discover the wormholes in the first place?”
“Trochee and Spond,” Lakshmi said, “gave us technology that can detect the rough presence of wormholes. You see, there are these particles called inverterons—”
“Inverterons. My sweep detected some of those—”
“Yeah, they’re known to humans, but technology like your sweep can only detect them at super close proximities. Which is why the US government has never discovered a wormhole and likely won’t anytime soon.”
“Okay.” I took a deep breath. “Right. So inverterons—do they come out of wormholes?”
“Kind of. They hold them open. The more inverterons, the longer a wormhole can stay open. And the more detectable it is.”
The conversation had definitely piqued my curiosity. “What’s the… strongest wormhole you’ve ever found?”
“Strongest isn’t really the right word. Long-lasting is better.”
“Okay, so what was the most—”
“Probably that one in Finland,” Trochee offered.
“It was in an abandoned mine just north of Helsinki.” Lakshmi’s eyes were gleaming. “Stayed open for eight whole days, on average, though that tended to waver a bit. Then it would close for two and a half days, then open again. Fortunately no one used the mine; I don’t think anyone knew about the wormhole but us. And it was quite a trek to actually get to the wormhole’s location; we had to go through all these tunnels…”
“And do you know where it leads?”
“Yup! We throw probes through all the wormholes and they give us coordinates.”
“And where does it lead?” I inched closer, excited.
“About fifty meters above southern Greenland.”
“Wow.”
“Pretty random, huh?”
“Not what I was expecting.”
“And we definitely haven’t found all of them yet!” Trochee interjected, grinning. His previous unexplained anxiety had apparently vanished. “Like… we detected a pretty high-energy one in Iraq, but we don’t really want to go check it out…”
I chuckled. “Understandable.”
“It’s all pretty crazy,” continued Trochee. “Did you know, some wormholes only open once every year? There’s one in Arizona that opens for three hours every two years… but it leads to the center of the Earth, so it’s not particularly useful. Or the one we tracked to Pakistan only to find that it’s erratic and there’s no way to tell when it will open. Or the New York to Japan one that opens for five years every fifty years.…”
“The gist of it is,” Lakshmi explained, “there are a bunch of wormholes that go a bunch of different places. We go around and map them. Isaac stores all the data in his brain.”
So that was why they created Isaac. At least that question had now been answered. “And—you four are the only ones who are part of this?”
“Part of it? Yes. Know about it? No, we have a couple other friends who help us out sometimes and are in on the whole thing. For example, I’ve got a friend who lives in Beijing and helps us track some of the East Asian wormholes.”
I nodded slowly. Okay, so wormholes were a thing. Human technology was a lot more advanced than I ever would have guessed. In any other circumstance, I wouldn’t have believed it. And yet—everything Lakshmi did seemed so legitimate. I’d swept the building; I knew something was going on. And if it weren’t about wormholes, why would she say it was? It was a much too risky lie.
Yet there was still so much missing from the picture. Who was Trochee, really? Why did he and Spond have such advanced tech? And where did they get it?
Out of the corner of my eye, I glimpsed one of the dots on the map slowly pulsating. It seemed to be the one closest to us. I raised an eyebrow at Lakshmi, and she grinned.
“Blinking light means the wormhole’s open.” She switched off the projector suddenly, walking towards the door. “We have fifteen minutes. Isaac, stay here.”
“What’s going on—?” I followed Lakshmi to the door.
Her grin widened. “Micah, I want to show you your first wormhole.”

13. Melissa

The best thing to do, Caerwyn and I decided, was to figure out what was wrong with Paloma. I thought we should take her to a hospital, but Caerwyn said it would be better to get her back to his lab. I supposed that was probably the more feasible option—explaining wormholes to hospital staff would not be a good idea.
The two of us lifted Paloma and, struggling not to drop her, awkwardly carried her down the hiking trail and back to Caerwyn’s van. The path to the car park was longer than was convenient, but we’d have to make do.
“How did you learn about the wormholes?” I eventually asked, my aversion to social situations giving way to my curiosity.
Caerwyn laughed. “Well, it’s a pretty weird story.”
“Tell me!”
“Alright.” He shifted his position to clutch Paloma’s legs a little bit tighter, then continued down the dirt path. “I grew up in Wales, of course. One day, when I was nineteen, I went on a day trip to Cardiff with some of my… er… well, I thought they were my friends. Anyway. We were walking around the docks, and I decide to tell them about something that… let’s just say it makes them very upset.”
“What did you say?” I immediately asked.
“I don’t want to talk about it. Suffice it to say they get mad at me, and one of them pushes me, and I lose my footing and topple into the bay. It’s such a shock that I can’t swim, I just… um… fall deeper and deeper. No, sink’s the word. I sink almost to the bottom. Of course I’m flailing around but that doesn’t do me any good. It’s terrifying and I can barely breathe.
“But, thanks to extraordinarily good luck, I suddenly spot this circle—sphere—hole thing that seems to be sucking water into it. Because I’m a curious idiot I swim towards it, and it sucks me in. There’s a sudden flash of light and sound, and then darkness. Next thing I know, it’s damp, and bright, and two men are staring down at me on the floor, and my head hurts like hell.”
“You went through a wormhole,” I said, excited.
Caerwyn nodded. “Didn’t know it at the time though. I was freaking out. The men are asking me all these questions and I have no idea how to answer them because I spoke very little English at that time. I’m still sprawled on the floor, and I begin to realize that I’m in a one-stall bathroom. There’s about ten centimeters of water on the ground, and some of it is seeping out under the door.”
“The water must have come from the wormhole,” I hypothesized. “These men—did they know about it?”
“Hang on, I’m getting there. Anyway. I’m still freaking out. I try to speak English but of course it comes out as Welsh. So one of the men helps me up, and they carry me out of the bathroom. Turns out I’m in a Chinese restaurant. It seems to be closed, which is good. One of the men gets his laptop, opens Google Translate, and has me select my language. Eventually we’re able to talk through Mandarin-to-Welsh Google Translate.”
“Is it any good?”
“It’s good enough for our purposes. Of course it gets some words and grammar wrong, and Google Translate could never deal correctly with Welsh mutations, but we can understand each other.”
“So where did the wormhole take you?” I asked. “China?”
“Nope. Turns out I’m in the middle of Arkansas.”
“Oh.”
“Yeah. Fortunately the men are very friendly and, y’know, good at waiting.”
“Patient?”
“Yeah. Anyway. The guy who had the Translate idea is called Bao, and the other one’s called Zheng. I learn that they’re brothers who immigrated to America a couple years ago. Apparently their restaurant is pretty popular. Anyway, I tell them my name, and….”
Caerwyn suddenly paused, looking unsure of what to say. He eventually continued, “You know, I never thought about it, but those two were the first people to call me by my real name.”
I cocked an eyebrow at him. “How does that work, then?”
“Well, Caerwyn isn’t my given name. At that point, everyone was calling me by my old name, so I took advantage of the fact that Zheng and Bao didn’t know me, and told them my chosen name instead.”
I was about to ask Caerwyn what his given name was and why he had changed it, but decided it really wasn’t any of my business. Besides, I didn’t know him that well. “Um… what happened next?”
“I explain how I’d fallen into the Cardiff Bay, and ended up here. Turns out Bao had been studying the wormhole for a while—he didn’t know where it led, but figured out that it was a wormhole. None of us know what to call it exactly, so we end up using the words ‘twll’, ‘kong’, and ‘hole’ interchangeably—those are, respectively, the Welsh, Chinese, and English words for hole. And they hadn’t told anyone else about it. We were the only ones who knew.”
“When did the wormhole appear? For how long?”
“A couple hours every week. Bao invented an elaborate contraption to pour water coming out of the wormhole back into it… that’s how they dealt with all the water. It was very clever.”
“So you had to stay in Arkansas for a week.”
“Yep. Bao and Zheng let me stay with them. It was a wild ride but they were very kind. They also helped me treat my injuries from falling out of the wormhole.”
“Did everyone in Wales think you’d drowned?”
Caerwyn grinned. “Fortunately not. I called my parents soon after I arrived in Arkansas.”
“What did you tell them?”
“That I’d be gone for a week and they shouldn’t worry about me. I made it sound like me and my friends had decided to stay in Cardiff for longer than we were originally going to.”
“What did you tell your… friends?”
A pause. Caerwyn’s eyes were cast downwards. “Nothing. I didn’t call them. I’m pretty sure they still think I’m dead.”
“Wouldn’t they have told your parents?”
“Apparently they never did.”
“Those are terrible friends.”
“They weren’t my friends,” he replied curtly.
There was another, longer silence. We’d come to the parking lot, finally. The Synecdoche Labs van was a large white minivan, nothing particularly fancy or out of the ordinary. It was also the only car in the parking lot. Caerwyn opened the back door, and we carefully laid Paloma on the back seats.
“So,” I said, as Caerwyn sat in the driver’s seat and I in the passenger’s, “I assume you eventually got out of Arkansas?”
“Yep. It was an interesting week, to say the least. I learned how to cook Chinese food, for one thing. I learned a ton of English and also some Mandarin. I also had to deal with a lot of rude Americans on the one day I thought my English was good enough to try being a waiter. That did not go down well. But Bao and Zheng were very kind, and I got free food, which was good.”
“How did you get back to Cardiff?”
“It was pretty awkward. I had to climb a ladder and jump into the wormhole, which was a melon-sized sphere a couple centimeters from the ceiling of the bathroom. Took a couple tries to get right. But finally I went through, and was able to swim up to the surface of Cardiff Bay. From there I got a train to my house… and, that’s the story I guess.”
“You work with Lakshmi Patil, right?” I asked suddenly.
Caerwyn looked surprised. “How did you know that?”
“I… well, one of her associates came to Kramer Hill at some point, so I looked her up, and I assume you work with her because you know about the wormhole too—”
“Wow. Yeah, that’s true. What about her?”
“I was wondering how you met her.”
He laughed. “That’s a story for another time. The short version is, a couple years later, she was in Cardiff investigating the wormhole there, and we happened to meet.” He took the keys out of his pocket, turning the car on. “Now, we should—”
Loud rock and roll music suddenly came blasting out of the speakers. I clapped my hands over my ears. Caerwyn jumped, looking absolutely terrified, and slammed the mute button. The car was blissfully quiet.
“Welsh rock?” I guessed, uncovering my ears.
“Yeah. Sŵnami. My favorite band. Sorry about that.” He looked sheepish.
As soon as Caerwyn started to back up the car, there was a sudden beeping. I checked my seatbelt—it seemed to be secure.
“Must be the door,” Caerwyn growled. “Never seems to—”
He froze, staring at the back seat of the car. The door, which should have only been open a crack, was wide open—and Paloma was gone.

14. Spond

“Spondee?” came Trochee’s voice from the stairs.
I jumped up from the couch, rushed to the door, and flung it open. Sure enough, Trochee was standing just outside, with Lakshmi and Micah behind him. I suppressed the instinct to fold my arms around him in a giant hug, instead greeting him with a curt “I’ve told you, it’s Spond! Not Spondee. That sounds stupid.”
“I’m sorry—”
“Whatever. Come in.”
The three of them shuffled into the apartment. Micah was the last to enter, staring around the room. It was a relatively small apartment, squished into the top floor of the building. But Lakshmi couldn’t exactly have chosen anywhere else—it’s not like we could move the wormhole.
“So,” Micah said slowly, “this is where you and Caerwyn live?”
“Yup.”
“I see.” They surveyed the space again, eyes flickering over the kitchen to the left, couches to the right, and the open door to the bedroom. “It’s… pretty small. And there’s only one bed.”
“Yeah. It’s fine. It works.”
“Are you like… together?”
Lakshmi dissolved into a fit of giggles. I had to stifle a laugh myself. Micah quirked an eyebrow, looking slightly deterred.
“Um, we’re both gay,” Lakshmi finally said.
“Oh. Whoops. Sorry.”
“It’s okay.” She spun around, eyes fixing on the wormhole. “How many minutes do we have, Spond?”
I glanced at the clock. “Four or five.”
“Right.” Lakshmi rubbed her hands together, gesturing triumphantly at the wormhole. “Ta-da! Look at this!”
Micah squinted. “What am I looking at?”
I supposed the wormhole might seem vaguely ordinary to some. It looked roughly like a three-foot glass sphere, or maybe a sphere made of mirrors, hovering above a table on the right side of the room. But as you moved closer, the light seemed to bounce in uncanny ways and the surface pulsed in a manner unlike that of a mirror.
“Is that—?” Micah crouched down, scrutinizing the wormhole with wide eyes. “That’s not a wormhole, is it?”
“Sure is,” I replied.
“And—wait. Who are you again?”
“Spond. Trochee’s… ah… friend.” I decided not to elaborate, in case Micah didn’t know about the pact.
“Well, what are you guys waiting for?” Lakshmi leaped onto the table, sticking her feet into the wormhole. The sphere distorted slightly at the disturbance. “We’ve only got a couple minutes until it closes. Let’s go in!”
“Are you crazy??” yelped Micah, but Lakshmi was already gone.
“Come on, go ahead. The wormhole won’t harm you.” I stuck my own foot in, feeling the now-familiar tingling sensation.
“Are you sure—?”
“Very sure. I’ve done this so many times, you don’t even know. Come on.” I removed my foot, proving it was intact, and beckoned Micah towards the wormhole.
A pause. Micah’s eyes darted from the portal, to Trochee, to me. “Where does it lead?”
“London. It’s very convenient. Come on, we’ve only got a minute.”
“Alright. Fine.” Micah maneuvered themself onto the table—not an easy task for someone who needed cybernetics to help them control their legs, I supposed. They stuck a foot into the wormhole, grimacing at the sensation, then finally pushed themself through.
“See? That wasn’t so hard,” I mumbled to myself. “Let’s go, Trochee. We’ve got a helluva lot to explain.”

15. Melissa

“Dammit,” muttered Caerwyn under his breath. “Where is she? Where could she have gone so fast?”
“The loud music could have been a distraction,” I offered.
“Mmm, yes, good point. And she used it to mask the sound of her opening the door. But where is she?”
“Could she have run back to the wormhole in this time?”
“Possibly. It’s not a long walk if you’re not carrying an unconscious body.”
“Should we check?”
“Probably best to.”
The two of us hurriedly got out of the van, Caerwyn making sure to lock it. Then we ran back up the trail. Caerwyn was right—it definitely didn’t seem as long this time.
The wormhole was still open when we got back. Someone must have been feeding it a lot of energy. Caerwyn stopped, surveyed the landscape. There was no mud or dust to leave footprints, but the grass around the wormhole was trampled. Was that from just now, or earlier when Paloma had come out of the wormhole?
Caerwyn gestured to the softly glowing sphere. “Hey. Y’know what. I’m just going to go in. Take a peek.”
“Through the wormhole?”
“Yeah.”
“Do you know what’s on the other side?”
“Antarctica?” He grimaced. “Probably not. I’ll come right back out if it’s freezing cold. But. Even if Paloma didn’t go back in, I might find out something about where she came from.”
“Good point.” I swallowed. “But just look. Okay?”
“Okay, okay.” Caerwyn grinned at me, then crouched down and stepped through the wormhole. The sphere distorted for a second, and then it was back to normal.
A pause. I waited. Five seconds. Ten seconds. Maybe I should go back to the van.
Then suddenly, the wormhole shifted slightly. I held my breath. But instead of opening up like it had before, it shrunk and then finally disappeared.
But where was Caerwyn? On the other side? And who knew when it would open again—the prolonged opening could have thrown off its schedule—
I froze. There was a rustle of leaves.
“Has the wormhole closed?” said a low voice behind me.

16. Isaac

Lakshmi said to stay here. So I stay here. I sit down on the floor and wait.
Twenty minutes pass. Then someone knocks on the door. It’s likely not Lakshmi, because she has a key. It’s probably a good idea to answer. I stand up, walk over to the door, and open it.
There is a woman outside the door. She is wearing a suit. She has very straight black hair, and light brown skin like mine.
“Hello?” I say.
“Hey. Is this Synecdoche Labs?”
“Yes.”
She takes my hand, shakes it firmly. “I’m Officer Trish Bower. I’m here because our Compliance Officer, Micah Roth, has not sent us a report as is standard proceedings. In fact, they have answered none of our comms and we have not heard from them since they got here. Therefore, I have been dispatched to meet with them in person.” She eyes me. “Do you work here?”
“Sort of.”
“Do you know where Officer Roth is so that I may speak to them?”
“Yes.”
“Where?”
I pause for a fraction of a second. “I’m not allowed to tell you.”
Officer Bower narrows her eyes. “What do you mean?”
“Lakshmi said that I can’t tell anyone else about the location.”
“Lakshmi? Is she a government official?”
“No, she is my… coworker.” I decide it would be a bad idea to say creator.
A pause. Officer Bower’s eyes sweep the messy room behind me. Micah’s instruments are still strewn about the floor. “What is your name?”
“Isaac.”
“And your surname?”
“Patil,” I reply, taking Lakshmi’s in a sudden improvisation.
She folds her arms. “Mister Patil, may I speak to this Lakshmi?”
“You can call me Isaac if you like.”
Officer Bower ignores me. “May I speak to her?”
“She’s not here.”
“Where is she?”
“With Micah. But I’m not supposed to tell you where that is.”
“I see.” She sighs loudly. “Mister—Isaac. Is there anyone else in this building, besides you, that I may speak to?”
“Not at the moment.”
“Is there anyone you can comm?”
“I could comm Caerwyn.”
“Would you mind doing that, please?”
I walk over to the table, open one of the laptops, and enter Caerwyn’s number. Officer Bower stays at the door, watching me. We wait for a minute. Nothing happens.
“That’s strange,” I say. “I can’t reach him.”
“Can you try anyone else? Lakshmi, perhaps?”
I try Lakshmi. The comm reaches her, but she doesn’t pick up. “It isn’t working.”
Another sigh. “May I search the building?”
“Do you have a search warrant?”
“Good point. I don’t. In that case… do you know when Officer Roth will be available?”
“Six hours and two minutes,” I tell her, since Micah has probably gone to through the wormhole as well. That’s the next time it will open.
“How do you know that—wait. Let me guess. You can’t tell me.”
“Correct.”
“I’ll come back tomorrow, then.” Pause. “Does Lakshmi have a phone number or email address that I can contact?”
Both those methods are less safe and efficient than comming, but I nod, and tell her Lakshmi’s email address.
“So what can I tell my boss?” she asks, after writing down the address. “Is Officer Roth getting their job done?”
“Definitely.”
“Okay, good. That’ll have to be good enough.” Officer Bower forces a smile that looks a bit like a grimace. “Thanks for your time.”
She shuts the door. I go back to my spot, sit on the floor, and go to sleep.

17. Caerwyn

I tumbled out of the wormhole into a dark room. Certainly not Antarctica. Slowly, I stood up, peering around the space. It was too dim to see anything, but my footsteps had a slight echo, and the ground felt uneven under my feet.
“O day and night, but this is wondrous strange,” I muttered.
“And therefore as a stranger give it welcome,” came a voice from behind me. I whipped around, heart pounding, but could still see nothing through the blackness. “There are more things in Heaven and Earth than are dreamt of in your philosophy.”
“You—you’ve read Hamlet?” was the only thing I could think of to say.
“I have indeed. Helped me learn English.”
“Did you find it hard, as a second language English speaker? I know I sure did.” Maybe, thought my panicking brain, if I made conversation, the situation would seem less scary. After all, I already had two things in common with the person with whom I was talking.
“Not really,” the voice replied. “It’s a lot easier to learn a language when you can upload the syntax and semantics directly into your brain.”
“...Ah.” I swallowed nervously. That was not normal. It sounded like a kind of technology Trochee and Spond would have. “So, are you going to turn the lights on, or…?”
There was a pause. Did I really want the lights to go on? But then again, nothing could be worse than the pitch-black of the unknown.
“Sure,” said the voice finally, and the lights flickered on.
The first thing I noticed was the substance of which the room was made: a shiny, smooth, deep turquoise material that wasn’t completely flat below my feet. In fact, the room seemed to have no corners; the transition from floor to wall was a gentle curve rather than a sharp angle. The walls had the same gentle, random curvature as the floor, making them look almost organic—though when I reached out and felt them, they were just cool, smooth stone. As I looked upwards, the ceiling in the room was much higher than what I was used to; it was difficult to see without craning my neck.
But the contents of the room were even stranger. A couple tables held machines whose purposes I could only guess. One looked a bit like a cannon. One reminded me of Lakshmi’s projector. The technology was like nothing I’d ever seen—except for in Spond’s shed. Meanwhile, the wormhole was gone. My escape route had disappeared.
And as I turned around, staring in awe and fright at the unfamiliar space, my eyes fell upon the source of the voice—and I scrambled backward, heart racing once more. The person standing in front of me—holy shit, they were definitely not human. Yes, she—I guessed she on a wild assumption—had a vaguely humanoid shape, but it would be hard to pass her by on the street and not completely freak out.
For one thing, her skin was blue—a very pale blue, not unlike the color of the sky or of a forget-me-not flower. She was wearing a plain grey body suit, that tightly fit her slim figure, and covered her legs, feet, and torso. Her arms, shoulders, and four-fingered hands remained bare, though—and as she moved closer, as if to inspect me, I could see why. Sprouting out of her shoulders, her head, and the back of her neck were a multitude of thin tendrils. Each one was a slightly darker blue than her skin, and they ranged from about a millimeter to a half centimeter in thickness. On her head, they were much thinner, and stuck straight up—one could mistake them for hair. Each one was about 20-30 centimeters long, and they seemed to wave back and forth slightly, of their own volition. On her shoulders, however, the tendrils weren’t a fixed length—they could extend, or retract back into her skin, and did so freely and freakily as I watched in horror. Meanwhile, her facial features were a bit more human—although uncannily smooth, as if someone had molded a human face out of clay, and not bothered to add ridges to the inside of the ears, or holes any bigger than slits in the nose. She didn’t have eyelashes or eyebrows, yet I could still perceive she was frowning slightly, slitted purple eyes tracking my every move.
I stood up as tall as I could, head spinning, trying to pretend I wasn’t quivering violently, in an attempt to appear more confident than I felt.
“So,” she said slowly, “let me guess. You’re human. You know about the wormholes. Judging by your seeming willingness to casually step through one, you’ve definitely encountered them multiple times. But judging by your surprised reaction to my appearance, you don’t know about the Alrescha.”
“What the actual fuck is happening,” I replied, unable to keep the terror out of my voice.
She laughed. “Don’t worry, my friend. I’m not going to hurt you.”
“How do I know that?” I took another step back.
“Look. I’m talking with you. I’m not trying to eat you, or whatever humans think aliens do—”
I froze. “You’re—an alien—?”
“Well, I’m not from Earth.”
“Where am I, then?” The room certainly had an extraterrestrial feel.
“Alrescha.”
“Which is…?”
“A planet.”
“Not Earth, then.”
“No. Quite far away from Earth, in fact.”
“And I assume you’re one of the, um, occupiers of Alrescha?”
“Inhabitants?”
“Oh. Sorry. Yeah.” My anxiety was doing nothing to help my English-speaking skills.
“Well, you’re right. I am.”
I expected some sort of emotional response to this news. Disbelief or skepticism, perhaps. But all that I could feel was a sort of fearful numbness, as if I were in a dream. Maybe the full reality of the situation would crash down on me in a couple minutes, but for now, I just accepted everything I heard, without properly, logically judging it. My heart was still beating at an absurd rate, but I took a couple deep breaths, willing myself to calm down. I’d never had to deal with a situation like this before. I needed to be rational.
“So, uh, I’m Caerwyn,” I said finally, unsure of what else to say.
“Cool. I’m Luthio.” A pause. “I’m curious, Caerwyn. How many humans know about the wormholes?”
The question was loaded, and almost sent me spiraling back into the panic from which I’d freed myself moments before. Why did Luthio want to know? What could I say? So I just told the truth. “Quite a few, actually.”
Her eyes narrowed slightly. “How many is ‘quite a few’?”
“I can think of, um, seven on the top of my head.”
“Ah. And how did you find out about the wormholes?”
“It’s—it’s quite a long story.”
“No problem. I’m sure we’ll have time for it later.”
Luthio turned away from me, activating a device on one of the nearby tables. It looked a little like a circular keyboard with a holographic screen. As I watched, she typed a couple strings of text in a language I couldn’t understand—then turned off the device and smiled at me.
“We have a lot to discuss. First of all… I don’t suppose you know a human woman named Paloma?”

18. Micah

The wormhole deposited me about three feet off the floor. For a second I lay there, trembling, trying to shake off the queasiness of travelling thousands of miles in a couple seconds. Then, aware that everyone else had their eyes on me, I slowly lifted myself up.
“I just went through a wormhole,” I whispered.
“You did indeed,” responded Lakshmi with a smile, helping me up. Once I was standing, I took a good look around the room.
It was a shed—larger than the average shed, but still unmistakably a shed. There was no other word for it. The walls, the floor, the ceiling—everything was made of the same kind of wood. It was dusty, but not unbearably so, and there was only one small window by the door. It could have been a tool shed or a gardening shed if not for the pieces of technology piled up on every surface. There were gadgets and wires and circuits everywhere, some of them assembled into actual machines, some in pieces. Some of these were carefully placed on various shelves, some on tables, and some just littering the floor.
“Welcome to my shed,” Spond said, spreading his arms and grinning.
“This is where you keep all your tech?” I brushed the dust off my pants and leg braces, inspecting one of the machines more closely. It looked kind of like a metal soccer ball, but smaller, and with lots of wires sticking out of the bottom. I didn’t have a clue what it was supposed to do.
“And where we built Isaac, too!” Lakshmi added.
I nodded distractedly, crossing to the door and pulling it open. The sight of a busy street at night greeted me. Was the shed built in a city? And the darkness struck me—it had been day in San Francisco. There was definitely something unfamiliar about the scene—the cars, the tall buildings in the distance, even the trees and plants. The sky was overcast; there were no stars visible.
I stepped out of the shed, glancing around. It was placed in the corner of an abandoned lot, right next to the street—not a very exciting location. But where were we? Had Lakshmi mentioned it? I didn’t quite remember—
“London,” came Spond’s voice from behind me. He had followed me out, closing the door behind him. “I quite like big cities, but of course this isn’t the ideal place to build such an important tech shed. Though the wormhole is pretty convenient…”
I turned to look at him—I hadn’t gotten a proper chance to do so before. What with all the lights from buildings around us, it wasn’t hard to see his face in the dark. He was taller than Trochee, with long, black, messy curls, and an age and ethnicity that was hard to place. He was wearing a large brown trench coat and jeans.
“Who are you?” I asked. Of everyone at Synecdoche, he was the most difficult to read.
“Spond Johnson,” he replied matter-of-factly.
“Is your name really Spond?”
He shrugged.
“So… you and Trochee are the ones who provide all this… technology.”
“That’s right.” He narrowed his eyes suddenly. “Did Trochee tell you about the pact?”
“I… don’t think so. What pact?”
“Interesting,” was the only thing Spond said, a hint of a smile on his face.
“Spond—where do you get all this tech?” The question had been bugging me for a while, and there seemed no better time to bring it up.
“That’s a very good question.”
“Are you always this purposely avoidant?”
“Only when I want to be. Are you always this curious about things that don’t concern you?”
“I see no reason why I shouldn’t be,” I replied, allowing a bit of venom to creep into my voice.
He turned toward me, looking straight into my eyes. “Why is Lakshmi showing everything to you? Aren’t you some government person who’s going to report us all to the tech authorities?”
“That is a good question too,” I murmured. “Wish I knew the answer.”

19. Paloma

The girl looked absolutely terrified. Was her name Melissa? I vaguely remembered that she’d mentioned it earlier. I stepped forward. She stepped back, narrowly missing the patch of ground where the wormhole had been only seconds before.
“What—what have you done with Caerwyn?” she finally stuttered.
“I haven’t done anything with him,” I replied. “He went through the wormhole of his own volition. I had nothing to do with it.”
“Yes, but well, you, you… you escaped, then came over here, and he thought you had gone through the wormhole, so he went looking for you, and you said ‘has the wormhole closed’ which kind of implies that you wanted the wormhole to close—”
I cut her off with a wave of my hand, smiling in spite of myself. “Good points. And yes, I did want the wormhole to close. I didn’t know it would close after Caerwyn, however.”
Melissa took a deep, shuddering breath, fixing her eyes on a point about a foot to the left of my head. “And you fainted—was that fake?”
“Yes. I assumed you’d want to get me away from there as fast as possible, so I faked a loss of consciousness to, for lack of a better word, spur you on.”
“Then why did you run away?”
Her insistence on detailing every part of the scenario was both fascinating and slightly irritating. I sighed. “I realized I shouldn’t leave the hill until the wormhole was closed. So I ran back to the hill and hid. I assumed you’d follow me and perhaps do something about the wormhole. Honestly, I made a lot of assumptions and leaps of faith. But I suppose it worked out.”
“But Caerwyn is stuck on the other side of that wormhole.”
“Well, he’s obviously encountered wormholes before. He’ll be fine.”
Melissa took a step closer to me, still avoiding eye contact but no longer looking so afraid. “What’s on the other side of that wormhole that you were so eager to get away from?”
I stayed pointedly silent. The correct answer was “aliens,” but I had no idea how to break that news to Melissa.
“Sit down,” I finally said, gesturing her to the side of the hill. “You’re not going to believe this, but….”

20. Lakshmi

“Does Spond really make all of this tech?”
Trochee started at my sudden query, tripping over his words to answer. “Um, not all of it. He fixes it, mostly.”
“Wonder where he gets it.” I saw Trochee start to protest, but I cut him off, smiling. “Yes, I know, the pact. I’m just curious, that’s all.”
He relaxed slightly. “Okay. Okay.”
“Trochee?”
“Yeah?”
“You know that I trust you, right?”
He swallowed, nodded. “Yeah. Just… I don’t like keeping secrets.”
“Perfectly understandable.”
A pause. Trochee’s eyes slid to the window. Micah and Spond seemed to be talking outside.
“Do you trust Micah?” he asked suddenly.
“I don’t know.”
“Then why are you explaining everything to them?”
I didn’t answer. I didn’t have a good response. Caerwyn had taken that first leap of faith, offering to explain the results of Micah’s sweep. I assumed it had been some sort of distraction. But then we’d ended up telling the truth…
“I guess I just wanted to give them the benefit of the doubt?”
“That’s fair, but….” Trochee’s face was a mixture of emotions; he fiddled with the hem of his sweater. “I dunno, Lakshmi. I don’t want our secrets falling into the hands of the American government.”
“I don’t either.”
Trochee looked like he was about to reply, but suddenly his eyes went very wide, staring at a spot behind me. I turned—and froze. The wormhole had appeared again. No, not only had it appeared—it was glowing in a way I’d never seen before. What should have been a static sphere was now twisting and writhing. Both of us took an unconscious step back.
“It’s not supposed to do that,” Trochee whispered, voicing my exact thoughts.
We didn’t have time to speculate. The wormhole molded itself into a shape not unlike that of a door, and three people stepped out. Immediately, the portal fizzled out of existence behind them. All three were wearing long, black coats that covered most of their bodies. Other than that, they looked fairly ordinary, like people you might pass on the street—a woman with rich brown skin and an afro, a pale and androgynous redhead, and a brunette woman with tan skin and a black beanie.
They know about the wormholes, was my first, panic-ridden thought. Trochee, who had jumped behind me in a futile attempt to hide, looked just as terrified as I felt. I searched the shed desperately for something that could be used as a weapon—but everything somewhat dangerous had been either disassembled or deactivated.
“Excuse me,” I said, with as much confidence as I could muster, “this is our shed.”
“I see,” replied the woman with the afro. Her eyes scanned the room, finally falling on Trochee. She smiled, but the expression held surprise. “Oh! Long time no see. Should’ve guessed you and your boyfriend were behind this.”
Trochee took another step backward, shaking his head wildly. “I’m—I’m not behind anything—and Spond’s not my boyfriend—”
“No matter. Where is he?”
“Absolutely no idea,” Trochee responded with an entirely unconvincing confidence.
The afro woman nudged the beanie woman. “Go find him.” She nodded, and disappeared out the door. I could only hope that Micah and Spond were prepared.
But my attention slid back to Trochee. His face was a mix of guilt and terror. How did he know these people? And, more importantly, how did they know where to find him?
“Trochee, what’s going on?” I demanded.
He shrunk back, as if wanting to melt into the floor. “Uh. These are my… old friends. That’s Koro, and Filku, and Alinio’s the one outside—”
I turned to Koro—the woman who had previously been talking—and put on my best glare. “How do you know about the wormholes?”
“I could ask the same of you,” Koro replied airily.
“How did you get here?”
Koro drew open her cloak, and plucked a small device out of pocket. It was slightly larger than her hand, a metal cylinder that curved into a tip at the end. She pointed it at the place where the wormhole had been minutes before, and in a flash of light, the portal appeared again, glowing and writhing in the same uncanny fashion.
If my heart had been beating fast before, it was positively hammering now. These people could open closed wormholes at will?? How would one acquire the sheer power needed to accomplish such a task—let alone fit it into a handheld device? They had to be manipulating inverterons—the particles that kept wormholes open—in some way.
“We came through the wormhole,” Koro said.
“I can see that—”
Koro cut me off, beckoning to Trochee. “Coming?”
He didn’t move. “Where?”
“Home.”
“I’m in pretty big trouble, aren’t I?”
She grinned. “Yeah, you could say that.”
“That… doesn’t make me more inclined to go.”
Filku, who had previously been standing in the corner and watching us like a hawk, strode forward and caught Trochee’s arm. He flinched, but didn’t resist. I moved to push them away, but Koro held up a threatening hand, and I froze. She was much bigger than me, and I didn’t doubt she would cream me if things got physical.
“Lakshmi, leave them alone,” pleaded Trochee. “It’ll be better for everyone. I don’t want you getting hurt. Please.”
“Come on,” Filku whispered in Trochee’s ear, tugging him over to the wormhole. It distorted as Koro placed a foot inside it, still watching me.
I didn’t know what to think. I didn’t know what to do. So I just stood there, staring with an open mouth and wide eyes, as Koro put her other foot into the growing portal, then disappeared as it swallowed her. Filku was almost through as well; I could only see the outline of their figure as they dragged Trochee with them.
“I’m so sorry, Lakshmi,” Trochee managed to call back to me, but the wormhole was already enveloping him.
And then it was gone, and I was the only person in the shed.

21. Melissa

“Aliens!!” I exclaimed, absolutely delighted.
Paloma sighed. “Yeah. I know you don’t believe me, but—”
“No, I believe you!”
“What?”
“I believe you. Aliens aren’t so far-fetched, in the scheme of things.”
“If you say so.” Her eyebrows went up, but she didn’t comment further. “There’s not much of a story, actually. I was taking pictures on the hill—”
“Why?”
“Oh, uh, I like photography, especially—”
“Okay cool, continue.”
“Anyway.” Paloma cleared her throat. “Somehow I fell into the wormhole. It was really dark, and there were aliens. That was a bit surprising.”
“What did the aliens look like?”
“Like blue humans with tentacles on their heads.”
“Oh.”
“Well, some of them were purple. One was green.”
“Interesting.”
“Also, they tried to brainwash me.”
“What the heck?!” I sat up, staring at her. “Why? How?”
“They didn’t want me knowing about the wormholes. But I escaped. They have some technology that keeps the wormholes open for long periods of time—”
“I was right!” I exclaimed, flapping my hands in delight. Someone on the other side, as I’d hypothesized, had indeed been holding open the wormhole. A second later, though, I realized I had interrupted Paloma again, and hurriedly motioned her to continue.
“So I went back through, and found you on the other side.”
“And I know the rest.”
“Yeah.”
“Is that it?”
“Pretty much.”
“Wait, Paloma….” A thought had crossed my mind. “They didn’t want you to know about the wormholes. Why?”
“Because apparently we’re not supposed to.”
“We?”
“Humans.”
“And they were willing to erase your memory because of that.”
“Yeah.”
“Then…” I paused, heartbeat quickening. “I don’t think they would want me to know about the wormholes.”
“No, I don’t suppose so.”
“Or Caerwyn.”
Both of us came to the exact same conclusion at the exact same time. Paloma’s eyebrows rose very fast.
“I think your friend might be in danger,” she said softly.

22. Spond

Koro, Alinio, and Filku. The three were unmistakable, even through the foggy window of the shed, and the sight sent chills down my spine.
“Micah,” I said, very quietly and very deliberately, glancing at the braces on their legs, “how fast can you run?”
They frowned at me, obviously not seeing the people in the shed or perceiving any kind of danger about the situation. “Not fast. Why?”
“We need to go.” I started down the street, but slowed when I realized that Micah wasn’t following.
“What’s going on?”
“No time to explain. Just come.”
They didn’t move.
“Please, Micah. You have to trust me on this.”
Perhaps a bit of fear seeped into my voice, or perhaps Micah noticed that I wasn’t one to say “please” very often, but they jogged over to join me.
As soon as they were near, I took off again. My pace was quick; I could only hope they were following suit. Sure enough, to my relief, when I glanced over my shoulder, they were right behind me. Just in time, too—the door to the shed was opening, and I glimpsed Alinio looking around. I didn’t have time to see if she had spotted us or not, but I increased my speed all the same.
I knew exactly where we were going. I dashed up the street, past flocks of annoyed Londoners, down the side street, across the crosswalk, around the honking cars. I didn’t even check if Micah was still following. A light drizzle had begun, but I paid it no attention. A couple times, I glanced behind me. Alinio was walking down the street, looking at a device in her hand. A tracker. My heart pounded.
“Where are we going?” yelled Micah.
“Here.”
We slowed in front of a Tube station—one of the entrances to the London underground rail service. I rushed in, not even checking if Alinio had seen us enter, and pulled my train pass out of one of the many pockets in my trench coat. I swiped it across one of the readers. I ran through the gate as it opened, and was about to jump into the elevator, when I heard Micah call from behind me.
“Hey Spond, I don’t have one of those!”
Shit. Well, they couldn’t exactly use mine. “Go buy yourself a ticket!”
They threw up their arms in indignation. “How do I do that?!”
“Use your credit card! That machine there!”
Micah turned to the ticket machine. I crossed my arms and rapidly tapped my foot against the floor. “Hurry up!”
“I’ve never used one of these things in my life!” came the disgruntled shout.
“It’s not very hard!”
After thirty very long seconds, and a lot of cursing at the machine, Micah finally managed to obtain a ticket. I watched anxiously, eyes flicking between the station entrance and the elevator. A sympathetic staff member helped Micah feed the ticket through the reader, and they emerged on the other side of the gate, glaring daggers at me.
“If you’d been a couple seconds faster, we might’ve gotten the elevator,” I grunted.
“It’s your own fault, asshole,” they shot back.
An excruciating minute later, the elevator doors opened. I almost didn’t notice—my eyes had been trained on the station entrance—but Micah dragged me in.
“Please do not obstruct the doors,” the perpetually annoyed robotic voice informed us.
“Why do we have to go so fast?” demanded Micah as the elevator started to move downwards. “Can you tell me that now?”
I eyed the only other person in the elevator—an old woman minding her own business—and shook my head. “Not yet.”
I ran out as soon as the doors open, and went sprinting off towards the platform for the Northern Line. But it was only when I was halfway down the flight of steps that I realized Micah wasn’t next to me. They were making their way down the stairs, very slowly and very carefully.
“Speed up!” I hissed.
“Shut it. It’s not like I can turn off my disability.”
“Sorry,” I muttered, and continued down the steps, slightly slower than before.
As soon as both of us were on level ground again, I took off towards the platform, Micah following and muttering about accessibility issues. To my great delight, I spotted a train arriving. I ran down to the end of the platform—the last carriage was, miraculously, empty. As soon as the doors opened, I hopped on and sat down. Micah collapsed in the seat opposite me, looking very tired and very frustrated.
“I hate you,” they said.
“I know.”
“I didn’t expect my first visit to London to be like this.”
The doors closed, and the train started to move. It wasn’t one of the new maglev ones, but I supposed it would be fast enough. At least, I doubted Alinio would catch us anytime soon.
Micah stared out the window into the blackness of the tunnel. “Where are we going?”
“I dunno.”
“What, you don’t have a plan?”
“The plan was to get on the Tube. I didn’t think about anything further than that.”
“Why the Tube?”
“It’s pretty deep underground. She won’t detect me from here.”
Micah arched an eyebrow. “Who?”
I buried my face in my hands. “It’s really fucking complicated, okay? These people I know—they turned up in the shed. One of them is following us. I don’t want her to find me.”
“Feel like explaining?”
“Not really.”
We rode in silence for a while. Surprisingly, no one got into our carriage at the next stop. It must’ve been very late at night.
But how did they find us in the first place? Surely they couldn’t track wormhole usage. And their bioscans probably weren’t good enough to single out Trochee and I. Unless….
“Shit,” I said aloud.
“What?”
“Oh, fuck. You’re not gonna like this.”
“What??”
I sighed. “Gotta turn off my chameleon. That’s how they’re tracking me. They can probably detect the signals it gives off.”
“Your—chameleon??”
“It’s kind of… a disguise thing. Hang on.”
I pulled up my sleeve, revealing the tiny metal implant in my arm. Wow. I’d almost forgotten it was there—I’d left it running for so long. I started to fiddle with the device—then stopped, looked up at Micah.
“You’re really, really not gonna like this.”
“Dude, what are you—”
“Promise me you won’t go nuts and abandon me at the next station?”
“I—what?”
“And don’t you dare take any pictures.”
“What the fuck is going on, Spond—”
“Promise?”
“Yeah, sure, but—”
I deactivated the device, and all the holograms that had surrounded my body for years flickered, and turned off.
I inspected my hands and arms. A slightly lighter shade of purple than I remembered. And I was going to have to get used to four-fingered hands again. I raked my hands through the floppy tendrils on my head.
“I’m gonna miss having hair,” I murmured, looking back at Micah, whose mouth was agape. They stared, frozen, not quite believing their eyes.
“Spond,” they finally whispered, “I really need you to explain.”
I laughed. Even my voice sounded a bit different. “I think I should probably do that.”

23. Caerwyn

“Paloma?” I repeated.
Luthio nodded. “I assume she went through the wormhole.”
“She did,” I responded warily. Until I knew Luthio’s motives, it was probably best to keep my answers short.
“In that case, I’ll send some people to go looking for her as soon as possible.”
“Why can’t you go yourself?”
Luthio blinked, as if expecting me to know the answer—then, suddenly aware that I didn’t, continued. “Oh, I don’t have a chameleon set up.”
“A what?” I frowned at her. “Like? The lizard? Or does the word have another meaning in English?”
She laughed. “No, it’s a type of technology. Named after the lizard, though.”
“What does it do?”
“Camouflage.”
“What?”
“It’s a camouflage technology.”
“What the hell is a camouflage?”
“...When something is disguised, or blends in with its surroundings.”
“I’ve never heard that word before in my life,” I replied, indignant and a little embarrassed. Come to think of it, there was a Welsh word that meant roughly the same thing. But the new emotions were a good sign: I wasn’t nearly as terrified as before. “But anyway. This technology… disguises you?”
“As a human, yes. It’s quite useful. But this is beside the point. Where is Paloma?”
Luthio’s tone was sharper than before, and my heartbeat quickened once again. I shrugged. “I don’t know. I came through the wormhole to see if she was here.”
Her eyes narrowed. “I see.”
“What do you want with Paloma?” I tried to make my voice sound inquisitive rather than accusative.
Luthio sighed. “Humans aren’t supposed to know about the wormholes.”
Oh.
“I’m a human.”
“Yes.”
“I know about the wormholes.”
“Indeed.”
I waited, but Luthio said nothing more, just waved her tendrils back and forth and watched me like a hawk. I had the sinking feeling that I was in too deep—meddling in affairs that weren’t mine to mess with. But before I could voice any of my thoughts or questions, a previously unnoticed door opened at the back of the room, and three more aliens entered.
The first thing I noticed was that all of them were wearing human clothing. I briefly wondered how the clothes fit over the tendrils on the aliens’ shoulders, but then remembered that those were retractable. Two of the new aliens—Alrescha, were they called?—wore long, black cloaks, while the third was in jeans and a generic white t-shirt. The first in the procession had much thicker tendrils than the others, and their skin was a shade of midnight blue that went nicely with their cloak. The other cloaked one had green skin, and short, purple tendrils—and was grasping the arm of the last alien. This third alien was very slightly shorter than the other three, with light, greenish-turquoise skin and blue, curly tendrils that stuck up in all directions. And while the two cloaked aliens were emotionless and businesslike, the third was gaping at me. I wondered if they’d ever seen a human before.
Luthio grinned as the three entered, addressing first the blue Alrescha, then the green one. “Koro, Filku. Good to see you.”
Koro eyed me. “Who’s this?”
“A human,” Luthio responded airly. “Nothing to worry about. Where’s Alinio?”
“Coming soon, hopefully.”
“Very good. You’re dismissed.”
Koro and Filku glanced at each other, then exited back the way they had came, leaving the Alrescha in the t-shirt standing there, staring at me. I wondered briefly how all of them could speak English.
“Why are you here?” they asked, voice a combination of fear and wonder.
I shrugged, in an attempt at nonchalance. “There was a wormhole.”
Luthio walked up to the Alrescha, inspecting them with a smile. “Haven’t seen you in a while.”
“Same here….” they replied distractedly. “But—Caerwyn—you just came through the Kramer Hill wormhole, right?”
What. I backed away. “How the hell do you know my name??”
“Oh, so the two of you know each other!” Luthio’s smile widened. “That does make a lot of sense.”
“No, we don’t—”
The Alrescha ran up to me, hand outstretched almost as if they were about to put it on my shoulder. I stayed completely still. Closer up, I could see how the facial features of Alrescha differed ever so slightly from those of humans. They desperately searched my face for any sign of recognition—and finding none, their tendrils seemed to droop.
“My disguise was really good, I guess….”
“Who are you?” In another situation, I might have felt pity for this alien, but the only thing I could feel now was confusion.
“I’m Trochee,” he whispered.

24. Lakshmi

Micah and Spond were not outside the shed. Neither, I noticed, was the woman who Koro had sent to fetch them. Alinio, was that her name? It didn’t even matter. Trochee was gone. Micah and Spond had disappeared. I hadn’t heard from Caerwyn in what had to be hours.
Where was the rest of my team??
I couldn’t panic. That wouldn’t solve anything. Yet it was hard not to feel totally alone, in an eerie shed in the middle of the night.
I commed Caerwyn. No response. I tried again. Nothing.
My eyes scanned the room. You have computers, Lakshmi. Use them.
I booted up the laptop on Spond’s desk. It was an older model than I was used to, but it would work fine. All the software that I needed was already installed. I connected my phone to the laptop, opened the terminal, and ran a couple processes. I’d only attempted this once or twice, but I roughly knew what I was doing. After a couple seconds, I commed Caerwyn again, and the program traced the signal.
Or, at least, it tried to trace the signal.
SIGNAL NOT FOUND, came the harsh, blaring error message.
Where was he? I’d sent him to check up on the Kramer Hill wormhole. It wasn’t one that we monitored a lot, so I didn’t remember where it went. Greenland, was it?
Isaac would know.
I switched tactics, opening up a new terminal window. Isaac was probably off. I could remotely hack in and switch him on—if I remembered all the passwords and port names—
Ten minutes later, I had accessed Isaac’s brain. I turned on all his systems, then opened a text chat between my computer and his AI.
Hi Isaac, I typed.
A second later, his response came: Hello, Lakshmi. I don’t believe we’ve used this form of communication before.
We haven’t, I typed back, but I figured this would be easier than comming you. I’m in a bit of a tight situation, and I need your help.
What kind of help?
Where does the wormhole on Kramer Hill lead?
According to my database, that wormhole leads to West Antarctica. Would you like me to give you the coordinates?
Could Caerwyn be in Antarctica? Maybe he’d gone through the wormhole to investigate, and his phone was malfunctioning from the cold. Maybe the wormhole had closed behind him. I definitely couldn’t be sure.
But then again, that was the wormhole that Trochee was always visiting. I’d never thought to question it before, but why would he be so keen on a portal to Antarctica?
Trochee added the data for that wormhole, right? I asked Isaac.
That’s correct.
Has anyone else added any data?
Spond added some.
The two people who Koro and company were looking for. And the wormhole had been acting up, too.
There’s definitely something weird going on, I told Isaac.
What kind of weird thing?
I’m not quite sure yet, but I believe Trochee and Spond have some secrets they’ve been hiding.
Why do you think that?
It’s kind of a long story. And I didn’t want to try explaining until I knew more of the full picture. Isaac—could you try comming Caerwyn? And, if possible, try and track the comm signal.
Sure, he replied.
I waited. Maybe the computers at Synecdoche would have an easier time getting through to him than I had.
I wasn’t able to reach Caerwyn, said Isaac after a minute, or trace the comm signal.
Alright. I had the same problem. I paused, considering the best course of action. Go down to the Kramer Hill wormhole. I trust you enough to use public transportation to get there. Bring a tablet, and comm me when you get to the hill. Tell me if anything unusual is happening there.
Okay, he replied. Then, as an afterthought: A government official came to Synecdoche, looking for Micah. I gave her your email address. She might have written to you.
I chuckled to myself. I hadn’t checked my email in about a year. Okay, thanks for letting me know. I’m going to disconnect now. Thanks for everything!
You’re welcome, Lakshmi, Isaac responded, and I closed the terminal.
Well. I’d just have to hope Isaac could get his job done without running into some kind of trouble. And as for the email from the government… I’d deal with that later. I had more pressing problems on hand.
If anyone had answers, Spond did. I commed him next. About five seconds later, Micah’s face appeared on the laptop screen. The picture was fuzzy, as if the signal was having a hard time getting through, and there was a lot of static and background noise.
“Where’s Spond?” I asked.
Micah glanced at something just in front of them, then looked back at me. “Um. He’s not available right now.”
“Why not?”
“He just, uh….” Another attention shift. “He went to the bathroom.”
“I don’t believe you. Where are you? Looks like the Tube.”
There were a couple whispers. Micah’s eyes shifted once more to something in front of them. “Apparently I shouldn’t tell you.”
“Why not?”
“Spond doesn’t want to be tracked.”
“So he is there, then.”
“No!” came two voices—one of them Micah’s, and one presumably Spond’s. I almost laughed.
“Spond, can I talk to you?”
“No,” said Spond. His voice sounded slightly different—probably the bad connection.
“Why not?”
“It’s a long story, okay?” Quietly—though I could still hear him—he muttered to Micah: “Turn it off.”
“Why don’t you want to be tracked?”
“Reasons,” he grunted.
“Why are you on the Tube?”
“I never said I was on the Tube.”
“Did you run away because Koro sent someone after you?”
There was a very long pause. Micah’s eyes were presumably on Spond. Then, in a low voice, Spond asked, “Where’s Trochee?”
“Koro took him through the wormhole.” I saw no reason to lie. Spond was the one keeping things hidden, not me.
I heard a muffled “fuck.” Micah looked extremely uncomfortable.
“You want to speak with her, Spond?” they asked.
“No.”
“I think you should tell her about the—”
“Nope. Turn it off.”
Micah obliged, and the line went dead.
I sighed, leaning back in my chair. It seemed I had to figure this one out by myself.

25. Isaac

I decide that the best way to get to Kramer Hill is by train. Fortunately, Lakshmi has a pass—I find it, and put it in my pocket. The station isn’t a long walk from Synecdoche headquarters, and the schedule for the train is easier for me to comprehend than that of the bus. The next train comes at 5:32, giving me about twenty minutes to get there, which should be enough.
As soon as I have my pass, some money, and the keys to the lab, I leave, making sure to lock the door behind me.
I have never taken the train before, but I assume it will be straightforward. I arrive at the station at the correct time, the train comes, I show my pass and get on it, I wait for a couple stops, and then get off. I imagine various scenarios as I walk to the station. What would I do if my pass is, for some reason, invalid? I suppose I would buy a ticket.
The walk to the station is uneventful. I notice a couple people eyeing me with odd looks. This isn’t uncommon—I don’t go out of the lab, usually, but when I do, people notice that there’s something different about me. I assume it’s the smooth and slightly uncanny way in which I move. Lakshmi told me once that she finds it a bit unnerving.
However, when I get to the station, the train is already there. I’m about to ask someone why it’s so early, but then I realize that the track only goes one way, and this is the station from which all southbound trains depart.
“Can I board the train now?” I inquire of an attendant, who nods.
I walk over and inspect the train. Surprisingly, it’s not a maglev. A large advertisement covers the entire last carriage. When I get on, more people are there than I expected. It is rush hour, I suppose. I find a seat next to a woman with a purple hijab, who is looking at her phone. She only glances at me when I sit down.
For the first two stops, the ride is mostly how I imagined it. The conductor gives reminders about which stop is next—which I didn’t expect, but are helpful all the same. The woman next to me leaves at the second stop. I spend most of the time looking out the window.
At the third stop, however, something happens that I wasn’t expecting at all.
As soon as the train comes to a halt, the wormhole detector in my brain picks up a trace of inverterons. No, not just a trace—an actual wormhole is appearing in the middle of the train hallway. I stand up, very suddenly, staring at the glowing sphere. People around me are reacting in various ways—panic, mostly—but I pay no attention to them. The portal grows bigger, and a person steps out of it. I don’t recognize them. They have short, orange hair, peachy skin, and a long, black cloak. And their eyes are fixed intently on me.
There is a rush of people trying to exit the train. I don’t follow. I have never encountered a situation like this before, and I can’t decide what to do.
“You’re the android,” they say softly, voice devoid of emotion.
I don’t reply. This is not someone I know. I don’t think they work with Lakshmi. They also have technology that Lakshmi doesn’t—the ability to open random wormholes at will. Third, they knew exactly where I was, and didn’t hesitate to disturb an entire train carriage to find me.
So I decide that they likely have hostile intent, and they are not someone with whom I would like to be associated.
The train’s doors have shut, and it’s already moving, but that shouldn’t be a problem. I rush to the door, and, despite the protests and threats of the conductor, wrench it open. The train is going quite fast, but not fast enough that a fall from here would cause lasting damage.
So I jump out.
I land on a bed of rocks, but my touch receptors aren’t strong enough for the impact to affect them in any meaningful way. Fortunately, my pursuer doesn’t follow. As soon as I am able, I stand up, dust myself off, and inspect my body. I don’t seem to have any serious scrapes, except for my palms and knees. From what I can tell, the scratches expose no wires or metal. My left palm is torn in a way that doesn’t quite resemble skin, but I doubt that any humans will notice.
Who was the person on the train? is the question that’s most on my mind. I assume that they were able to track me in some way. Being an android, I’m more easy to track than a human. And they likely did so because they wanted access to the technology inside of me. But I don’t know how they were able to open a wormhole where there hadn’t been one before. I will have to ask Lakshmi about that.
According to the GPS in my brain, Kramer Hill isn’t far from here. I should be able to walk.

26. Paloma

Melissa and I walked back down the trail to the parking lot, discussing our plan of action. Caerwyn’s van was still there, but we couldn’t exactly use it without him. The two of us sat on a small, metal bench right by the start of the trail, next to a tiny plaque with a map of the hiking route.
“We could call the police,” Melissa suggested after a long period of silence.
“I don’t think they’d understand.”
“Yeah. I don’t think so either.”
“When will the wormhole open next, do you suppose?”
She thought about it. “I don’t know. Probably not for a few hours. But the forced opening and closing may have shifted it away from its schedule.”
“Hmm. Who does Caerwyn work for again?”
“Synecdoche Labs.”
I took out my phone, and did a search for Synecdoche Labs. The group didn’t have an official website, but they did have a couple sparse pages on various social media sites. There was surprisingly little information about them.
Melissa glanced at my phone. “Are you looking for contact information?”
“Yeah.”
I tried the provided comm number. Nothing.
“They don’t usually answer their comms,” Melissa told me.
“What, have you tried comming them before?”
She looked a little sheepish. “Yeah. Quite a few times.”
“Excuse me,” said a male voice I didn’t recognize.
The two of us looked up immediately. A boy of indeterminate age was standing before us, completely still. He had curly black hair and light brown skin, and was wearing an orange sweater with a couple holes in it. His hair was disheveled, and his face and arms bore dirt marks and scratches.
“Hi…?” I replied warily, pocketing my phone, standing, and stepping forward.
He didn’t react to my movement in any way. “Have you seen a blonde man anywhere here? That’s his car.” He gestured to the Synecdoche van.
“Caerwyn?” offered Melissa.
“Yes. Do you know where he is?”
“Why do you want to know?” I asked.
“My coworker Lakshmi sent me to find him.” The boy’s answers were almost creepily methodical, with a noticeable lack of emotion.
Melissa sprung up. “Lakshmi! She does work with Caerwyn!”
“How do we know you’re an associate of Lakshmi’s?”
He produced a card from his pocket—a train pass with Lakshmi’s name on it. I noticed that his palm was scraped as well—more so than his face, but it wasn’t bleeding at all.
I eyed him. “How come you’re so banged up?”
“I jumped out of a train,” he said in a much too calm voice.
“You—what??”
“I jumped out of a train,” he repeated, with almost the exact intonation.
“Why the hell would you do that??”
“I probably shouldn’t tell you.”
There was a slightly awkward silence. I noticed that the boy had barely moved throughout the entire conversation. Then Melissa asked, very quietly, “You know about the wormholes, right?”
He turned his unblinking eyes on her. “Yes.”
“Well, then…” If this creepy guy was Caerwyn’s coworker, and he knew about the wormholes, I assumed it would be a good idea to tell the truth. “Caerwyn went through the wormhole on the hill.”
“That one leads to Antarctica. Why would he do that?”
“It doesn’t. It leads to an alien planet.”
“Oh.” A significant pause. The boy did not seem fazed by this news. “What are your names? I think I should contact Lakshmi.”
“I’m Paloma. This is Melissa. And you?”
“Isaac.” His lips twisted into a sort of half-smile. “Thanks for your information, Paloma and Melissa. I think that Lakshmi will be interested to hear about the alien planet.”

27. Micah

“So, you’re an alien.”
Spond pressed a hand to his forehead. “What did you think I was, a human going to a Star Trek convention?”
“I’m still finding this a little difficult to wrap my head around—”
“Yeah, yeah. I get it. Aliens don’t exist. Well, news flash, they do.”
“Will you shut up for five seconds. I still think you should tell Lakshmi.”
The train came to another stop. I saw only one person on the platform—a woman who glanced into our carriage, did a double take, and hastily boarded a different car. I couldn’t blame her.
“No,” said Spond.
“Why not?”
“I don’t want to get her involved.”
“Look, dude, she’s going to be involved whether you like it or not.”
He stayed pointedly silent.
“She deserves to know.”
Spond made a sound that was halfway between a sigh and a groan, and buried his face in his hands. I noticed that each hand had only four fingers. “I know, okay? I know. But I don’t want to admit that I’ve been lying to her since I met her.”
I didn’t know what to say. “Well… you could at least explain to me.”
“It’s a long story.”
“That’s what you say every single damn time. I bet it’s not even that long of a story.”
“I don’t want to talk about it.”
“At least tell me what happened to Trochee. Some people took him through a wormhole? Why?”
Spond didn’t answer. His hands were still covering his face, but he was shaking.
“Are you… are you crying?”
“No,” came the muffled reply. It sounded a bit like a sob.
Silence again. We passed some more stops. No one came onto our carriage, as usual. I wondered how busy the Tube usually was in the daytime.
The next time I looked back at Spond, his hands were lowered. He met my eyes, a look of grim determination on his face.
“Trochee’s an alien too,” he said. “We’re from a race called the Alrescha. We created the wormholes to observe humans.”
“Oh,” I replied. I wasn’t sure if I should be glad that Spond was finally opening up to me, or terrified at the implications of his last statement.
“Trochee and I were two of the observers. But then we met Lakshmi and Caerwyn. Humans weren’t supposed to know about the wormholes—”
He stopped, considering his words. “Well, shit. I thought I would be able to explain the whole thing in a couple sentences, and get it over with. But it’s a much longer story than that.”
I leaned forward eagerly. “I’m listening.”

28. Spond
Five years ago

“They know about the wormholes,” I said as soon as the hotel room door was shut. I sighed, collapsing onto the couch. “They’re humans. And they know about the wormholes.”
“Not that much!” Trochee flopped down beside me. “Their technology isn’t that good. They’ll never be able to discover more than one or two—”
“How do we know that?” I threw my hands up into the air. “What if they stumble across a wormhole to Alrescha? We have to tell Luthio. She’ll deal with it, and we can move on.”
“Deal with it?”
“You know what I mean.”
“Wipe their memories, that is.”
“Yeah. I know.”
Trochee looked pained. “I dunno, Spond. They’re nice people.”
“Yes, and they’ll continue being nice people! Just won’t stick their noses where they don’t belong.”
He laughed. “You’ve picked up some human sayings, I see.”
“That isn’t relevant.”
“It’s kinda cute.”
“That’s even less relevant.” I stood abruptly. “The closest wormhole to Alrescha opens in ten minutes. It’s just outside the city. I’m going to go talk to Luthio.”
“Are—are you sure that’s necessary?”
“I just… I don’t want to leave something like this unreported, okay?”
He stood too, sighing deeply. “Okay. Do it your way. When are you coming back?”
“Tomorrow afternoon, maybe. You’ll have the room all to yourself.”
Trochee looked a bit more disappointed than I would’ve guessed. “Yeah, but I’ll be all alone.”
I chuckled, grabbing my backpack off the couch. “What, aren’t you sick of me by now? Seeya, Trochee.”
I was out the door before he could say another word.
*
“This isn’t good,” Luthio muttered. She paced back and forth, then took another look at my holographic data sheet, as if the numbers would change if she stared at them long enough. “You’re right that the technology isn’t too advanced. But according to these figures, this woman Lakshmi is improving it every day. The girl’s a damn genius.”
“I could go and sabotage their tech, if you like.”
“No. That won’t do any good. She’d figure out a way to rebuild it.”
“Is she really that good?”
Luthio looked me in the eyes. “From the data you’ve given me? Yes.”
*
A week later, we’d moved locations to be closer to Lakshmi and Caerwyn. But not everything had gone exactly as I’d expected.
“You did what??”
“We made a deal! It’s okay! I was careful!”
I pulled Trochee into the apartment and slammed the door behind him, keeping a firm hold on his upper arm. “Giving humans Alrescha technology is not careful; it’s fucking careless! Do you have any idea—”
“I didn’t tell her where it came from!”
“Oh, like that excuses it.”
“We have a deal! I gave her some wormhole tracking stuff, and she promised not to ask where it came from!”
“Like she’s going to honor that deal.”
“She will! I trust her!”
“She’s a human!” I yelled.
“Humans aren’t stupid!” Trochee yelled right back.
“I know! I know. That’s what I’m worried about.”
I released his arm—which I’d probably been gripping a bit too hard—and he backed away. I thought I saw some fear in his eyes. “Spond. Just give them a chance, okay? All they want to do is explore this phenomenon that, as far as they know, is natural on their planet. You can’t hate them for being curious.”
“Curiosity killed the crab,” I muttered. “Isn’t that one of their sayings?”
“Cat. And I know. But it’s okay. We don’t have to tell Luthio.”
“I already told Luthio to be on the lookout. It’s out of our control now.”
Trochee stepped forward, an almost pleading look on his face. “It doesn’t have to be.”
*
“Are you happy now?” I asked Trochee a couple days later.
“What?”
“Luthio asked for updates on the situation. I told her that I’d taken it into my own hands and brainwashed Caerwyn and Lakshmi.”
Trochee’s eyebrows shot up. “What did she say?”
“She wasn’t pleased that I’d acted without her permission. But she’s glad that ‘the threat’s gone’.” I put massive air quotes around the last three words. “So. Are you happy?”
He didn’t speak for a couple seconds. Then he sighed, apparently with relief. “I’m glad that they’ll be able to study the wormholes.” Pause. “Are you?”
The question caught me off-guard. “I—I don’t know. I guess it’s their right to know about stuff that happens on their own planet. And I guess that’s why I lied to Luthio.”
I didn’t want to admit that I’d mostly lied to Luthio to make Trochee less upset.
*
A sinking feeling settled in my stomach as I read Luthio’s message, two months later.
“What is it?” Trochee asked, sensing my discomfort.
“She’s recalling all the observers,” I said quietly.
“What??”
“We’re all supposed to go back to Alrescha. She’s gonna close most of the wormholes between Alrescha and Earth, and leave the humans alone.”
“But why?”
“She said that their technology is getting too advanced, and we run the risk of being discovered. And besides, she doesn’t want to interfere with their civilization any more than we already have.”
Trochee’s brows were furrowed. “We haven’t really interfered at all, have we? We’re just observers. That’s what we’re called, and that’s what we do.”
“I don’t like it any more than you do, but I don’t want to go against Luthio again.”
Pause. He looked out the window of the apartment. “I’m going to miss Earth.”
*
“Spond.”
I blearily opened an eye. “Trochee…? What time is it? Go back to your room—”
“What if we stayed?”
It took me a full ten seconds to understand what he was talking about, but then it dawned on me, and I sat up. “Stayed? On Earth?”
Trochee’s face was lit up in excitement. “Yeah! We could pretend to go back, but then sneak out through one of the wormholes before she closes them. We could help Lakshmi and everyone. Maybe we could smuggle some more Alrescha technology back. It’d be great!”
“Go back to sleep, Trochee. That’s a terrible plan.”
Little did I know that, less than a week later, the two of us would be enacting that very plan.

29. Trochee

I listened, eyes cast downward, as Luthio briefly explained the last ten years of the Alrescha and the wormholes. How Spond and I were observers. How we’d mysteriously disappeared after Luthio closed most of the wormholes. How they hadn’t thought much of it, and had turned their eyes away from Earth for five years.
Caerwyn’s eyes were wide. Out of the corner of my vision, I could see him glancing at me periodically, almost unable to believe his ears. I didn’t want to know what he was thinking.
Then there was a pause. Luthio had finished her story, and was now looking at me expectantly.
“Trochee? Anything to add?”
“Nothing,” I murmured. That was a lie. There was so much I wanted to clarify to Caerwyn—why we’d stayed, why we’d provided the technology, why we’d never explained that we were from another planet. But I couldn’t bear to do it in front of Luthio.
“In that case….” Luthio’s eyes flicked to the door, where an attendant was standing. I didn’t know them. “Caerwyn, I’m going to have to ask you to wait for a little while. I need to clear up some things with Trochee.”
I froze. I did not want to be stuck alone with Luthio.
Caerwyn’s brow furrowed. “I—can’t I go back through the wormhole?”
“No,” came Luthio’s pointed reply. “We need to keep you here. Thalnee will show you to a room where you can wait.”
The attendant strode forward, motioning Caerwyn towards the door. He reluctantly followed, keeping his eyes on me as he left. I didn’t speak to him. I didn’t know what I could say.
Then Luthio and I were alone in the gigantic room, face-to-face for the first time in over five years.
“So,” she began, abruptly switching her language to Alrescha, “it’s nice to see you again, Trochee.”
“It’s been awhile since I’ve spoken Alrescha,” I responded in the same language.
“No matter. It’ll come back to you.”
My eyes went to the door where Caerwyn had left. “Are you going to wipe his memory?”
“Probably not,” was Luthio’s casual response. I sighed with relief—a human mannerism I’d picked up over the ten years I’d been on Earth. “He’s got too many memories of the wormholes. It wouldn’t be a safe procedure.”
“What are you going to do with him, then?”
“We’ll likely keep him here for a while. At some point we’ll need to have a proper conversation.”
“And will you send him back?”
“Eventually.”
“Good… humans don’t exactly belong on Alrescha.”
“Alrescha don’t exactly belong on Earth,” she retorted.
A pause. I knew Luthio—this wasn’t going to be a short conversation. She wasn’t one to get to the point quickly and easily. “Look—Luthio—please just tell me what you want from me.”
I could feel her eyes boring into me. “First, I want to know where Spondee is.”
It felt weird to hear Spond’s full name. “I don’t know.”
“Are you sure?”
“Yeah! I have no idea. I thought he was just outside the shed.”
“According to Alinio, his signal completely disappeared.”
The news that they hadn’t found Spond yet filled me with relief. But how did Luthio know that? I spotted a small device in her ear—probably the way she communicated with Alinio and the others. “Um… how are you tracking him?”
“Through his chameleon.”
“He must’ve turned it off, then.”
“So I figured.” She chuckled. “That’ll cause some confusion for the humans. But anyway. We’ll find him eventually.”
Luthio’s casual statement sent a jolt of anger through me. How could she be so confident? Spond knew what he was doing. He wouldn’t let anyone catch him.
“Whatever you have to say to Spond, you can say to me,” I said finally. “It’s my fault we stayed so long on Earth. It’s my fault we gave Lakshmi and Caerwyn the wormhole detection technology.”
If Alrescha had eyebrows, Luthio’s would have shot up. “That—that was you?”
Whoops.
“So you’re the reason the humans have Alrescha technology.” For the first time in the conversation, Luthio’s voice had a definite edge. “I should’ve guessed.”
“What are you going to do?” All my previous anger had dissolved into fear.
“I have a couple ideas.” Luthio pushed past me, activating a holographic screen on a nearby computer. “We’ll deal with you and Spond after we deal with this mess you’ve made.”
“It’s not a mess—” I started, but Luthio whipped around and cut me off.
“It’s a mess. At least three humans know about the wormholes. We’ve detected Alrescha technology at at least two sites on the Earth. An android made with said Alrescha tech is on the loose. And at least one Alrescha without a functioning chameleon is wandering around London. This situation is out of control, and it will continue to be a mess until we’ve rounded up everyone involved.”
She turned back to the computer. I opened my mouth to say something—perhaps retort in some way—then reconsidered and closed it. Maybe Luthio was right. Maybe we’d gone a little too far.
But I couldn’t help wondering—what had provoked all this? Why had Luthio suddenly sent some old observers to come and find us? I didn’t dare ask.
Luthio finally shut down the computer and turned to me. Her tendrils were drooping slightly; she looked tired. “I don’t need you right now. I have everything under control. It’s gonna be fine.”
It sounded less like she was just telling me that, and more like she was trying to reassure herself.
I noticed another attendant at the door, waiting expectantly for me to go with them. What else could I do? So I took a final glance at Luthio, then followed.

30. Melissa

Isaac removed a small tablet from his pocket, typing in a comm number. I noticed some scratches on it like the ones on Isaac’s body. A couple seconds later, a woman’s face appeared on the screen. She was Indian, and had long, black hair, with red at the bottom. As far as I could tell, she looked concerned. I assumed this was Lakshmi.
“Who the hell are you?” was the first thing she said.
Paloma glanced at me, then turned back to the screen, answering quickly. “I’m Paloma. This is Melissa. We… uh… found a wormhole.”
“Is Isaac there?”
Isaac, who had been holding the tablet to face us, turned it around and waved.
“What about Caerwyn?” asked Lakshmi, after Isaac rotated the tablet back to its original position.
“He went through the wormhole,” replied Paloma cautiously.
Lakshmi’s eyebrows shot up. “And… do you have any idea where the wormhole leads?”
“An alien planet,” I said.
She stared at us, obviously not believing it. “Hang on a second. I think you need to tell me everything.”
Paloma launched into the story she’d told me before, describing her encounter with aliens, her escape, her faked unconsciousness, and everything that Caerwyn and I had done. Lakshmi listened in amazement. I couldn’t quite tell if she believed us or not, but she certainly looked engaged.
About halfway through Paloma’s story, my own phone buzzed. An audio comm from my mom. My stomach clenched. I stepped away from the others, opening the comm as I walked across the parking lot.
“Hello?” I asked in Spanish.
“Melissa, where the hell are you??” came my mom’s voice, responding Spanish as well. It was a little hard to make out her words through the phone. “I said you could go to the hill for an hour. It’s been much longer than that. You have work to do! Come back here now!”
I fumbled for an excuse. “I—I—I missed my train.”
“Couldn’t you have gotten another one?”
“Maybe?” I didn’t like lying—not to mention I was very bad at it.
She sighed. “Come on, Melissa, I know you’re not telling the truth. Where are you?”
“At the hill.”
“Look.” Another sigh. “I’m not about to judge you for your obsessions—”
“Special interests.”
“What?”
“It’s called a special interest. That’s what the autistic community calls them.”
“Okay. Your special interests. I don’t want to judge. But… what’s so interesting about that hill, Melissa?”
“It’s a very nice hill,” I said. It wasn’t untrue. “I like it.”
Fortunately, my mom didn’t press me further. “Okay. I don’t pretend to know what goes on inside your head, Melissa, but if it’s safe, and it makes you happy, I don’t care why you like the hill. But you can’t go up there all day, every day.”
“It’s summer.”
“You have biology work to do.”
I hate it, but she’s right. “I don’t like biology.”
“You like physics.”
“They’re very different.”
“Whatever. It’s a required course. If you study this summer, you probably won’t fail it again next year.”
I knew that. She’d told me that at least ten times. “I failed it because the teacher didn’t give me accommodations! I don’t need to study!”
“Yes, you do. Please come home.”
“I can’t.” I glanced back at Paloma, Isaac, and Lakshmi—Paloma had almost finished telling the story. “I’m in the middle of something important.”
“Your education is important!”
“I’m doing something educational!”
“What are you doing?”
“I—” What could I say? “It’s complicated. But it’s really important to me.”
Pause. “When will you be home?”
“I don’t know. I’ll—call you back in a few minutes.”
My mom sighed. “Okay, Melissa. I’m sorry if I sounded angry. I’m just worried about you.”
I didn’t know how to respond, so I just made a sound of acknowledgement.
“See you soon, hopefully,” she said, and ended the call.
I stood there for a second, staring at my phone, taking deep, calming breaths. It wasn’t my fault. It was my teacher’s fault. He didn’t know anything about autistic people.
And besides, aliens and wormholes were much more important to me right now.
I turned back to Paloma and Lakshmi, who were finishing up their conversation. Lakshmi’s face held an emotion I couldn’t quite read—shock, perhaps, or simply exhaustion.
“Isaac,” she said quietly, “take Paloma and Melissa back to Synecdoche HQ. Explain everything to them. I… I need to figure some things out.”
She abruptly shut off the comm.
Paloma glanced at me. “You okay?”
“Oh, uh, yeah—”
“You look a little rattled.”
“It’s okay,” I replied. “Let’s go to Synecdoche.”

31. Micah

We’d come to the end of the Tube line. The station was deathly silent—I again wondered what time it was. But I was glad no one was here—I doubted anyone would have reacted well to a purple, tentacled alien in a trench coat.
“Where to now?” I asked Spond.
“I guess we leave.”
“Should we comm Lakshmi?”
“No.” Spond fiddled with the device embedded in his arm. His entire form flickered, and suddenly he was human again. His long, wavy hair and tannish-brown skin seemed extraordinarily mundane compared to his previous appearance.
“Didn’t you say they were tracking you with your disguise tech?” I asked as we slowly climbed the flights of stairs and stepped onto the escalator.
“Yeah.”
“Why are you turning it back on, then?”
“I don’t want humans staring at me. And besides. It’ll take her a while to catch up to us. We’re pretty far from the nearest wormhole.”
We reached the exit. Spond swiped his card against the reader, and I fed my ticket through.
The street outside felt very different than the one on which we’d entered the Tube. It was quieter, for a start—and there were fewer people. The streetlights and stores gave some light, but for the most part, it was relatively dark. The buildings also had a different feel that I couldn’t quite put my finger on—perhaps they were made out of a different kind of stone, or maybe it was just the absence of fancy restaurants or tourist stops. Everything was damp, as if it had just stopped raining.
But I only got a couple seconds to drink in the streetscape, because a glowing wormhole suddenly burst into existence on my left.
My first instinct was to stop and stare, but apparently Spond had other plans. He took off in the other direction just as two figures emerged from the portal. I couldn’t see them clearly, but both were sporting black cloaks.
Run, my mind told me, and I ran.
“You said there were no wormholes around here!” I shouted to Spond, who was a good ten feet ahead of me. I could feel my legs beginning to falter—the braces that gave them motion couldn’t quite keep up with all the signals my brain was sending.
“There aren’t!” he yelled back.
Our pursuers weren’t running—they were walking calmly forward. One of them held out a device that looked a bit like an old TV remote, or maybe a science fictional gun. There was a flash of light, a crackle of electricity, and suddenly Spond crumpled on the pavement in front of me, as if he were a marionette with its strings clipped.
I skidded to a halt, heart beating at an alarming pace. But before I could move, one of the pursuers brushed by me and hoisted Spond’s body over her shoulder, like he weighed nothing. A couple things fell out of the pockets of his trench coat.
Without even glancing at me, the two of them strode back through the wormhole, which collapsed as soon as they were gone.
I stood in the middle of the pavement, staring at the spot where the portal had been seconds before, trying to regulate my breathing so as to slow down my heartbeat. It did no good. The rest of the day had seemed almost unreal, like a phantasma or a hideous dream—and now I had suddenly woken to the fact that all of this was actually happening. Maybe it was the experience of being completely alone on a dark street in a country of which I had no knowledge that had brought me to my senses.
It took me a second to realize that my phone was buzzing. I quickly pulled it out of my pocket—and froze. My boss, Jeremy Exton.
I walked over to a nearby bench, regretting every decision I’d ever made, and sat down, opening the comm.
“This is the fourth time I’ve tried to comm you today,” said Exton, his voice pompous as ever, “and this is the first time you’ve ever neglected to send a standard report, Officer Roth. Where are you?”
“I’m—” I paused, hoping my anxiety didn’t creep into my voice. “I’m waiting.”
“Waiting? For whom? According to Trish Bower, you aren’t at Synecdoche Labs.”
I almost laughed. That was certainly true. “I’m not. We switched locations a bit. That’s why I wasn’t answering your comms.”
Fortunately, Exton didn’t press further. “And why haven’t you sent a report yet?”
“I don’t have my equipment with me… I can’t gather data at the moment.”
“Well, tell me what you’ve found so far.”
I hesitated. “What kind of findings do you mean, sir?”
“Any illegal technology?”
Was wormhole detection technology illegal? Were sentient androids illegal? I vaguely remembered some drama a couple years ago concerning the ethics of strong AI, but other than that, I’d never had to deal with either before. And it wasn’t like Spond had pirated software from the US government. So I tentatively replied, “No.”
“Anything we should know about?”
Should the government know about the Alrescha? Aliens who had been observing the Earth for decades? Maybe yesterday I would have immediately spilled everything to Jeremy Exton. Today, I didn’t know what I was going to do. But it didn’t seem like a good idea to make even more people involved.
And I didn’t know what Exton would do with the information. Maybe he wouldn’t believe me. Maybe he’d fire me. Or worse, he would believe me, and he’d investigate. Who knew what would happen if the US government had access to the wormholes? Or what would happen if the general public found out that aliens had been spying on them for years?
“No,” I said, more firmly than before.
“Look, Roth.” A loud sigh. “I want that report by tomorrow morning. Got it?”
“Got it.”
He hung up.
I wasn’t going to send him a report. And if I did, it would be fake.
Is that why Lakshmi trusted me with information about the wormholes? Did she know that I held my own sense of ethics over my loyalty to my government?
A glint of metal on the pavement pulled me out of my reverie. Spond’s phone. It had fallen out of his pocket when the cloaked figures had picked him up. I walked over and retrieved it, a sudden idea forming in my mind.
Perhaps I could comm Lakshmi.

32. Caerwyn

The attendant led me down numerous confusing passageways—all made out of the same turquoise material as the first room, and just as dimly lit. I could hear snatches of conversation in languages I didn’t know, and sometimes I glimpsed other Alrescha, but for the most part, no one passed us in the hall.
Finally, we came to a series of small rooms at the end of one corridor. Each had a small window looking out into the hallway, which seemed to be made out of some rippling energy barrier, like a forcefield. None of the rooms were occupied. Each one also had a sliding door with a pad next to it. As I watched, the attendant pressed his hand into one of the pads, and the door slid open. I stepped in, and it slid shut.
The room was barren except for a small table and a bench, both made out of the same material as everything else. Tentatively, I sat down. The room was cold—not unbearably so, especially since I was wearing a binder under my t-shirt, but I wished I’d brought a jacket.
I was alone, trapped in a prison-like room on an alien planet.
So Trochee and Spond were aliens, were they? The previous conversation played itself over and over in my mind. That must’ve been why they’d had the technology to detect wormholes. But so much was still missing from the picture….
I remembered when Lakshmi and I had first met the two of them. We’d driven up to the middle of nowhere—an icy field in Canada with no sign of civilization in sight—because Lakshmi’s rudimentary wormhole detection tech had led us there. We were about to give up hope, when we noticed two men standing in the middle of the snow, arguing. Both pairs were surprised to see the others there, and we both skirted around the question when asked what we were doing up here. But then the wormhole appeared, ten minutes later, and one of the men—Trochee as we later learned—yelped in delight and cried “it’s finally back!” After that, both parties were forced to explain everything. It turned out that the wormhole led to Tel Aviv, where Trochee and Spond had been on “vacation”—they’d gone through it, wondering where it lead, and then it had abruptly closed and they’d gotten stuck on the other side.
Being four people with the same pastime—looking for wormholes—we’d combined our forces and founded Synecdoche Labs, sometimes letting other people in on the secret so we could find more wormholes faster. Trochee and Spond talked about their past sometimes, but only from the last ten or so years. The time they’d been on Earth, I now knew. Yes, they’d been a little odd at first, but I’d never suspected anything like—
A sudden sound outside the room pulled me from my thoughts. I peered out the forcefield-window—standing abruptly when I saw the attendant walking down the hallway, Trochee following. They were gone before I had the chance to call out; I doubt Trochee saw me anyway.
I returned to the bench, contented to explore my memories for a little while longer.
An indeterminate amount of time later, another Alrescha passed by, who I recognized as one of the people who had brought Trochee to Luthio. This time, however, she was carrying a limp human body—who I realized, with a sinking feeling, was Spond. She passed me by without glancing into my room.
So they had Spond too. What would Luthio do now? Punish them for what they’d done five years ago?
Whatever it was, I didn’t think I was going to like it.

33. Lakshmi

Aliens. Well. That was one explanation I hadn’t exactly been expecting.
I didn’t have time to think properly, however—a minute after I’d shut off one comm, a notification popped up on my computer requesting another one. From Spond’s phone, I realized with surprise. Oh god. I didn’t have the time or mental energy to deal with this.
But when I opened the comm, Micah’s face stared back at me, not Spond’s. They looked a bit rattled.
“Where’s Spond?” I demanded.
“Not… not here.” Micah’s voice was nervous and hesitant.
“Where is he, then?”
“I don’t know.”
“Where are you?”
They glanced around at their surroundings. “I actually have no idea.”
“Why did you comm me?” It was hard to keep the exasperation from my voice.
“Uh… to see if you could help me.”
“With what?”
They blinked. “I’m… I’m just very confused right now. Aliens—well, I think they were aliens—showed up and kidnapped Spond, and—”
“Aliens?? Elaborate.”
Micah shook their head. “I don’t know if I can explain it.”
But a sudden light behind me had caught my attention. I whipped around—and there it was again, the wormhole twisting and glowing unnaturally. I shut off the comm’s viewscreen but left the audio—another witness to whatever was about to happen could be useful.
“Something’s happening, Micah,” I hissed, standing. “Be quiet. Just listen.”
They didn’t respond. I could only hope they’d done what I asked.
The wormhole warped once more, and then suddenly vanished—leaving a figure slightly taller than me in its wake. I tried to jump back, but bumped into the table on which my laptop was sitting. This person—with her smooth, blue skin, and the thin tentacles on her head and shoulders—was most certainly an alien. And she was smiling in a way that I didn’t like at all. My heart pounded.
“Hello,” she said. “I’ve heard a lot about you, Lakshmi.”
“How do you know who I am?” I growled. Perhaps if I appeared confident, I’d feel that way too.
“Spond and Trochee told me about you.”
That was not what I’d expected to hear. “And who are you, then?”
“My name’s Luthio. I’m from the planet Alrescha.”
A million questions whirled about my brain. I sank back into my chair, keeping a wary eye on Luthio. She didn’t seem armed—or aggressive in any way—but I couldn’t tell for sure. In a pinch, I supposed I could use some of the longer or heavier tools in the shed as weapons, but I didn’t know what would be effective against an Alrescha.
“Why are you talking to me?” I finally asked.
“You’re the foremost wormhole expert on Earth,” she replied serenely, “and I’m the expert on Alrescha. Seems fit that we should meet.”
I vaguely remembered the red-headed woman at Kramer Hill—Paloma, was it?—explaining that an Alrescha had tried to wipe her memory: because she was human and therefore wasn’t supposed to know about the wormholes.
“You’re not going to brainwash me, are you?”
Surprise flashed across Luthio’s face. “Oh! I see you’ve met Paloma.”
“Are you?” I pressed, a rising panic in my chest.
“No, no. The situation’s now far beyond something we can solve with a simple mind wipe. Paloma isn’t our concern anymore.”
“The situation,” I echoed.
“The wormhole situation.” Luthio’s eyes went to a chair in the corner of the room. “Mind if I sit? We have a lot to talk about.”
I nodded slowly. So far, Luthio’s only motive seemed to be educating me about the source of all the chaos that had unfolded in the last couple hours. And that was exactly what I needed.
“So you’re just going to… explain everything?” I inquired as Luthio pulled up the second chair and dusted it off. “Just like that?”
She sat down and locked eyes with me. “First you have to explain something.”
My heartbeat quickened again. “Yes?”
“Tell me how you found out about the wormholes.”

34. Spond

I awoke to a dull pain in every part of my body. I was slumped forward, resting my arms and head on some sort of table. The air was relatively cool, and as I blearily cracked open my eyes, I noticed that the table beneath me was a familiar turquoise color.
Oh, shit. I was on Alrescha.
My last memories flooded through my brain—cloaked figures coming through a wormhole that definitely shouldn’t have been there, and stunning me. I’d been stunned before, and the sensation was never pleasant. But hey, at least I wasn’t dead.
“Spond…?” said a familiar voice that I hadn’t heard in awhile.
I jerked my head up, ignoring the pain that came with the action, and fixed my eyes upon my companion, sitting next to me on the bench—Trochee. He’d switched his chameleon off, and now appeared to me as his true form: a green-skinned, blue-tendriled Alrescha.
“Where the fuck are we?” was my first, frantic question.
“Alrescha.”
I scanned the room. It was small, with a forcefield for a window—definitely a brig or holding cell. “Who put us here?”
“Luthio.”
Of course it was Luthio. Who else would it it be.
“So she knows about what we did.”
“Yeah.” Trochee looked pained. “She knows we abandoned her and gave Lakshmi Alrescha technology.”
I pressed my hands to my forehead. “Well. That’s that, I guess.”
A pause. I saw Trochee shift positions out of the corner of my eye. I willed myself not to look at him.
“I know what you’re going to say,” he said quietly.
“No, you don’t.”
“You’re going to blame me for everything that’s happened.”
I said nothing. He was right; the thought had certainly crossed my mind.
“And honestly? You’d be right. It is my fault. I gave Lakshmi and Caerwyn that tech. I convinced you to stay on Earth. I let Luthio take me.”
“Trochee—” I sighed, keeping my eyes fixed on the door in front of me. “Yeah. That’s true.”
“And—Spond, I know you hate me, but—”
I whipped around, finally looking him in the face. “What the hell, Trochee? I don’t hate you—”
“—But I just can’t be like you all the time,” he finished.
“I—what? Who says that you have to be like me?”
“You’re just so much better at everything, and so self-confident, and so in control of everything….”
Trochee trailed off. His eyes were downcast; he was shaking slightly. What could I say? That I fucked up sometimes too? Everyone did, and surely he knew that….
“Why would you think that I hate you?” I finally asked.
Apparently this was the wrong reply, because Trochee stood suddenly, leaning against the wall and purposely looking away from me. There was complete silence for a couple seconds. I noticed Trochee fiddling with the implant in his arm. A moment later, he was human again, with his light brown hair in a messy ponytail.
Then he said, very quietly, “You know what I think, Spond?”
My heartbeat inexplicably quickened. I waited for him to answer his own question.
“I think you’re scared. You don’t want anyone to know that you care about them, because that’ll make you weak. You’ve taught yourself to never show affection, or fear, or sadness, because they’ll all make you weak, and you don’t want that. Because I know there’s a part of you that’s very scared, and very insecure, and you lash out to cover it up.”
“Shut up!” I yelled. “Shut up, Trochee. You don’t know what you’re talking about.”
He knew exactly what he was talking about.
Trochee turned around. There were tears in his eyes. “Don’t I? We’ve known each other for ten years, Spond.”
“Yeah, but—”
“And you think I haven’t noticed that you’re not as rock-solid as you seem?” He almost sounded like he was pleading now.
“What are you getting at?” My voice was dangerously low.
“I just—I just wanted you to see that you don’t have to hide your emotions.”
Silence again. A tear trickled down Trochee’s cheek.
Oh.
“Are you sure this isn’t about your emotions?” I asked slowly.
“What—what do you mean?”
“As you said, we’ve known each other for quite a while. You think I haven’t noticed that you’re in love with me?”
Trochee’s eyes went very, very wide and he took an unconscious step back. “I’m—what do you—what does that have to do with anything?”
Well, he wasn't denying it.
I stood. Now we were eye-to-eye—and I had the upper hand. “I wonder if you’re hoping that I feel the same way about you as you do about me?”
He said nothing—just moved away from me until he had backed into the wall.
“And that’s why you want me to show my emotions more? So it would be easier for you to tell?”
Trochee was frozen, caught like a deer in headlights.
“I’m, uh, really hungry,” he whispered finally, completely switching the subject. “Do you suppose they’ll have human food here? I’ve become particularly fond of mac n cheese….”
I sat down. The sudden switch was irritating—I hadn't gotten anything out of Trochee—but the distraction inexplicably relieved me. “Maybe. It’ll be nice to have Alrescha food again, though.”
“Yeah….” Trochee visibly relaxed, glad that I wasn’t continuing the previous conversation.  He fixed his eyes on the floor again, anywhere but on me.
We sat in silence for awhile, neither one daring to speak.

35. Paloma

We took the train back to Synecdoche Labs HQ. Isaac tried to get tickets for us, but had a hard time with the ticket machine, so I helped him out. After we’d caught the train, we sat in almost total silence. Rush hour was over, so the train was relatively empty.
“Oh, crap,” I said suddenly.
Melissa, who was sitting next to me and had previously been staring out the window, started. “What?”
“I forgot my camera.”
“Oh.”
“Come to think of it, I didn’t see it on the hill.” Where could it have gone? Probably one of the aliens took it—I remembered mentioning it after I went through the wormhole.
“That’s sad,” said Melissa.
“It’s fine. It’s not important. I can look for it later.”
“Okay.” She paused, fixing her eyes on the window again. “Is that your interest? Photography?”
I nodded. “Yeah. Well, that and journalism. And meteorology. Well, really only the nephology branch, but—”
“My interest is astrophysics!” Melissa interjected excitedly.
I laughed. “I can tell. Physics is cool.”
“Physics and meteorology sometimes intersect.”
“Definitely.”
“What were you taking pictures of?” she asked suddenly. “The wormhole?”
“Ahh… no.”
“What?”
“Clouds.”
“Clouds! That’s why you like meteorology!”
I nodded, somewhat embarrassed. “Yeah. I, uh, actually run the leading blog on in-depth cloud classification—”
“And that’s where it meets journalism!” she exclaimed. “All your interests fit together. That’s nice.”
I grinned. “I’m glad you don’t think I’m weird.”
Melissa looked at me as if I’d just proposed the moon was made of cheese. “That isn’t weird! Pursuing your interests isn’t weird!” She pointed at the sky out the window. “What kinds of clouds are those?”
Leaning over, I inspected them. They were wispy and translucent—so definitely cirrus—with slight curls and curvature at the end. “I’d say cirrus uncinus.”
She beamed, bouncing up and down in her seat slightly. “Very impressive! Good job!”
I shrugged, trying to appear modest while internally swelling with pride at the compliment. “It’s not a very hard cloud to identify. It’s got the signature… uh… swooshy bits.”
I regretted the extremely unprofessional terminology as soon as it came out of my mouth, but Melissa’s laugh was worth the embarrassment.
Soon enough, the train stopped at its last station—San Francisco—and we got off.
“How far is Synecdoche?” I asked Isaac as he led us down the street.
“Not far,” he replied.
I was about to ask what we were going to do there, but suddenly, Isaac stopped in his tracks. I followed his gaze—and froze as well. A yard-long glowing sphere had appeared in the middle of the sidewalk, 20 or so feet away from us.
“Another wormhole!” Melissa cried in delight.
“Isaac?” I inquired cautiously, “is that normal?”
“No,” he said.
As I watched, a cloaked figure stepped out out of the portal, and fixed their eyes on Isaac. The three of us instinctively backed away.
“I’ve seen this person before,” Isaac told me quietly. There was, curiously, no fear in his voice. “They came through a wormhole and appeared on the train. That’s why I jumped out.”
I strode forward towards the advancing figure. They apparently were not expecting this sort of resistance, and stopped walking, scrutinizing gaze turning on me instead.
“Who are you?” I demanded.
“It doesn’t matter. I’m here for the android.”
“Uh… we don’t have any androids here—”
“I’m an android,” came Isaac’s voice behind me.
Oh. Well, that at least explained his lack of emotion and gesture. Today, it seemed, I was ready to believe anything.
“What do you want with him?”
The cloaked person blinked. “He contains technology that doesn’t belong on this planet. I’ve been instructed to apprehend him.”
On this planet. I could only guess what that meant. But I didn’t have time to speculate—our pursuer whipped a device out of their pocket and shot a bolt of energy at Isaac. He dodged it with impressive agility, but Melissa wasn’t so lucky—the shot hit her right between the shoulder blades, and she collapsed onto the pavement. My stomach clenched.
The cloaked attacker moved to fire another blast, but I dashed forward and kicked the device out of their hand. It landed in the street, a couple feet away from me. Apparently my high school self-defence training had come in handy. Both of us scrambled to retrieve it, but I got there first, and promptly fired it at them. They ducked, and the blast hit the window of a building behind them, which shattered instantly. Before I could try another time, the attacker had leapt back through the wormhole. It disappeared behind them, leaving no trace.
I whirled around. Isaac had picked up Melissa’s limp body like it weighed nothing—another benefit of being an android, I supposed. “Is she okay??”
“She’s unconscious,” replied Isaac.
“But alive?”
“Yes.”
I ran up to him, putting two fingers to Melissa’s neck. She was, indeed, alive, to my immense relief. I took a deep breath, trying to calm my reeling mind.
“Have you ever seen a weapon like this?” I held out the device I’d taken from the cloaked attacker. Upon closer inspection, the machine had a dozen or so buttons on the bottom, and two different ends that fit together neatly, each with a large button to shoot. I wondered what the other end did, but didn’t dare test it.
“I don’t think so,” Isaac said.
I pocketed the device. “We can figure it out later. Let’s get Melissa to the lab.”

36. Trochee

I spent the next couple minutes in complete silence, perched on the edge of the bench with my eyes fixed pointedly on the wall. I’d entered a state of sort of confused, fragile numbness. If Spond said anything, I was sure I’d burst into tears. And I most certainly did not want to break down in front of Spond any more than I’d already done. So I willed him not to speak.
How did he know how to tear me open so completely and effectively?
And had I done the same to him? I was positive that everything I’d said about Spond had been correct. But he was better at concealing his emotions than I was, and I couldn’t tell. For all I knew, he could be feeling as raw and vulnerable as I was.
My thoughts were interrupted when the door flung open suddenly, and Koro stepped into the room, a frown on her face.
“What’s up?” she asked in Alrescha, shutting the door and scrutinizing the two of us.
Neither of us spoke. I glanced at Spond; his eyes were on Koro. He was scowling.
“What are you doing here?” Spond’s voice dripped with disdain.
“I’m here with a message from Luthio.” Koro paused to see if either of us would react, then lifted an eyebrow-ridge when no one did. Spond’s face was full of anger and frustration. As for mine… I had no idea, but I probably looked terrified, for so many reasons. “Seriously, guys, what’s up? Did you like… get in a fight or something?”
“None of your fucking business,” Spond growled.
“What’s your message from Luthio?” I whispered.
“Luthio and I have come to something of a conclusion about your punishment.”
My stomach dropped. I might’ve shared a glance with Spond, but I didn’t feel like making eye contact with him.
“Punishment for what?” said Spond slowly.
“You know perfectly well—”
Spond stood, walked over, and looked Koro in the eyes. She backed away, somewhat discomforted.
“Tell me,” Spond whispered, voice deadly, “exactly what we’ve done wrong.”
“Alright, alright,” she muttered. “Just get off me.”
He stepped back, and sat once more. “Explain.”
I had to admit, there was something very attractive about Spond when he was being so elegantly dangerous. But I most certainly didn’t want to think about that right now.
“The two of you,” Koro began, “have directly disobeyed your mission commander. First of all, you shared Alrescha technology with humans, and second, you stayed on Earth when the observer mission was called off.”
“I don’t see why any of that is wrong,” said Spond after a short pause.
“You’ll have to bring up any complaints with Luthio,” Koro replied curtly.
“I plan to do so.”
I piped up, not even trying to keep the nervousness out of my voice. “And… what are our punishments?”
“You’ll lose all your government privileges, as well as some citizen privileges, such as rights regarding wormholes and inverterons.”
I nodded. That was expected. But it was the next part I was worried about—
Spond voiced my exact question. “And how do we regain those privileges?”
“You’ll have to retake the agent training program.”
I froze. “The… the whole thing?”
“All of it.”
“We don’t need to do it all again!” Spond yelled, indignant. “We’ve done it once! We remember it!”
“Clearly not,” Koro said, a small, smug smile on her face. “And besides, you’ve been on Earth, with no Alrescha contact for a while. Surely you’ve forgotten some things.”
I shut my eyes. I did not want to relive the awful memories associated with that training program. Yes, it had been worth it, but… it had certainly been an ordeal. Well. Maybe it would be better this time, if Spond was with me.
Koro seemed to read my mind, because she casually added, “The two of you will be separated, of course….”
All my hopes vanished. Spond’s eyebrows shot up. “Look—it’s okay. We don’t care about our government privileges anyway. We can just—”
“And,” Koro interrupted, clearly taking some delight in her deliverance of such grim news, “you won’t be able to visit Earth.”
I should’ve been expecting that one, but it still hit me hard. I might not ever see Lakshmi again. Or Caerwyn. And I certainly wouldn’t be able to spend much time with Spond.
“That’s all.” Koro opened the door, a kind of sinister grin on her face, and disappeared.
“Well,” Spond muttered after a considerable pause, “I think I’d rather be locked up in a labor center like they did in the old days.”
If I’d been in a better mood, I might’ve made some joke about how he’d gotten his wish—he wouldn’t have to endure me for much longer. But that just seemed cruel, given how pained Spond looked already.
Maybe a bit of his vulnerable side was showing.

37. Lakshmi
Sixteen years ago

On June 5th, there was nothing in my treehouse but a single beanbag. Of course, I had bigger plans for that treehouse—we’d built it only a couple months ago. One day, the windows would have curtains, and I’d put a table in there, and a power outlet, and I’d stabilize the rope ladder. Maybe I’d even have shelves to house boxes of electronics.
On June 6th, there was definitely something in the treehouse that hadn’t been there previously. It was as if space itself had warped into a sphere, two feet in diameter. It just hovered in the corner of my treehouse, part of it overlapping with the wall.
I didn’t know what to think. Only a week later was I brave enough to approach it. The sphere never moved, or disappeared, or changed its shape. Sometimes I found leaves in the treehouse from trees I knew were not in our backyard. I could only conclude that they somehow came from the sphere.
I saved up money to buy a GPS probe. It was relatively crappy and therefore inexpensive, but it did what I wanted it to do—it would transmit its exact spatial coordinates to my phone every half second.
So, one day, a couple weeks after I had first discovered the mysterious sphere, I sat on the beanbag in my treehouse and tossed the probe through. I was very surprised when, at one moment, the probe was at my house in New York—and the next, it was in a forest in southern Japan.
I’d discovered a wormhole.
The next day, after making sure I had all the vaccinations for an international trip, I packed a backpack full of snacks and emergency gear, and journeyed through the portal.
A truly amazing forest greeted me

Tuesday, May 5
Mom told me to write, but I don’t like writing. It doesn’t make as much sense as math. Numbers make more sense than words do, except words in computer languages or logic problems. Those make sense.
I need to rephrase that first paragraph: words do have a certain logic to them, but only when they’re used properly. I can’t stand run-ons or fragments or incorrect grammar, or the red or green underline that results from typing something with bad grammar or spelling into an old word processor, like mine. Words are strange entities indeed.
However, numbers are much neater than words. There are rules in both math and language. In language, the rules are always broken. In math, the rules are almost never broken.
The messiest form of language is speech. It’s all right to use fragments in speech; sometimes I do as well. It seems like speech has a completely different form than written language does. I don’t like speech. Rather, I don’t like to talk to people. But people want to talk to me. I make it clear I don’t want to speak to them, so why do they insist on trying it anyway?
In programming languages, however, the words are almost elegant in their logic. This is the form of language I deal with most often. I read many books, but I enjoy programming even more. My parents don’t think I should program. I try to explain that computer language is very similar to prose, but their objection seems to be in not the language itself; they are disapproving of the technology.
My mom is a journalist; my dad is a painter. They want me to be more artistic. I don’t want to be artistic. Art doesn’t make sense. Most of all, they want me to have friends. I don’t want friends. I can keep myself occupied with only my computer. Why must friends be present in my lifestyle? Will it benefit my health in some way?
My name is Torrin Kaluza. I’m fifteen years, two months, and nine days, and I am in ninth grade. I live in San Francisco, California. I’m a girl, even though Torrin is sometimes a boy’s name. I like computers, and I know five programming languages.
I should probably describe myself. I have orange hair that almost touches my shoulders, and brown eyes. I like t-shirts, but not long-sleeved shirts, because they feel weird on my arms. Sweaters are okay, though. I don’t like the color pink, though, or red, so I don’t wear either of those colors unless I have to, and when I do, I’m grumpy for the whole day. I like tennis shoes and hiking shoes, but not flip-flops. The last time I wore flip-flops was at an end-of-year pool party in fifth grade, and the tops of my feet got sunburned, and I couldn’t wear socks for days because it hurt so much.
In third grade there was a girl called Emily who always tapped her stylus on the table during tests. Even worse, the taps were irregular. This (figuratively) drove me insane. I don’t suppose there was a logical reason to tap her stylus in the first place, but to tap it irregularly… it was as if Emily was doing it deliberately. Couldn’t she see the ghastly lack of pattern that resulted from her tapping?
Even worse, the teachers decided I needed a friend. They put me at the desk next to Emily. Emily talked to me. I didn’t talk to her back. She kept trying to get my attention to help her during math. I didn’t understand why she needed help in the first place—surely everyone understood math? Sometimes Emily would tap me on the shoulder to try and get me to look at her. These two torturous actions were almost more than I could bear. I hate when people touch me. Making eye contact is agony as well. And I most certainly could not stand Emily.
When I finally let Emily know of all the things she was doing to make my life worse, she told me she was shocked. “I had no idea you didn’t like that,” she said. “You could have just told me before.”
I couldn’t have told her before. I hate talking to people as well, as I said. I was very annoyed. Later that day, I told my parents about Emily.
They took me to see some psychiatrists, who later diagnosed me with Asperger’s Syndrome.
My parents wanted to put me in the special education class. I disagreed. I have no “special needs”. I can function adequately with neurotypical kids. So they mainstreamed me, reluctantly.
Now I am in ninth grade, as I said before. I talk more than I did in elementary school, but I still don’t like talking unless I’ll get useful information out of it.
I don’t connect to people very well. I don’t understand their humor or other figurative concepts. I like to understand things. But I can connect, in a way, with artificial intelligence. The brain of an AI makes more sense than the brain of a human. If I program the AI myself, it’s easiest to understand. I’m willing to talk to it because it’s easier to guess what it will say back. Of course, this depends on the type of AI.
It’s very hard to guess what other people will say to me. Often it’s something irrelevant or something that doesn’t make sense. I like when people tell me facts, or things that make me think. Those are interesting. I don’t like chatter. It’s ironic that the AIs I program most are called chatbots.
There are good aspects of being on the autism spectrum. (Actually, there are many good aspects, but not everyone sees them as “good”.) I also have a condition called Savant Syndrome. Some autistic people have it. It means that I am a savant—a person who is very good at a particular subject, such as math or memorization. Savants understand these things much better than neurotypical people do. I think I am good at programming because I am a math savant.
Mom says I should write what happened at school today. Nothing very important did. I found out that a boy from the special education class has Asperger’s Syndrome like I do. I wonder why he isn’t in the regular class like I am. Maybe his AS is more severe than mine is. I’ll admit, I’m curious about him. Maybe I’ll talk to him at lunch tomorrow. I wonder if he doesn’t like talking to people, like I do.
The most important thing that happened today was on the news. We, like everyone who owns a television, get instant wireless service and connection to the Ambinet—the successor of the Internet—from satellites. On the news, a man was talking more about the Luddites. They’re not going to hold the Loebner prize this year.
The Luddites are a group of people who believe that artificial intelligence is evil. They often say that they also hate the idea of the Singularity, which is the time when AI will become truly intelligent—as intelligent as humans are. Perhaps the Luddites are scared of truly intelligent AI.
I don’t understand why. AI is very useful and interesting. But, the Luddites think that if someone makes an intelligent AI, it will take over the world and cause a robot apocalypse. That’s why they hate it and want to stop it. Of course, they have other reasons too.
They also say that it’s against God to create artificial lifeforms. I don’t like it when they say AI is against God. That’s stupid, and it makes no sense. God doesn’t exist. If there were an omnipotent being in the universe, it would probably be the result of the evolution of an alien superintelligence, or a Boltzmann brain.
A man called Ian Caulkins is the founder of what he calls Neo-Luddism (but people usually leave out the “Neo-” prefix). It isn’t a new idea or word, though. Around the Victorian era, Luddites were people who destroyed machinery because they were afraid that it would make them unemployed. Now, it means people who don’t like technology. There are other groups called Neo-Luddites, who aren’t as powerful and definitely aren’t evil. They just don’t want technology in their lifestyle.
The Luddites have been active for seven years and eight months, now. I think Ian Calkins and all the other Luddites are infiltrating the government. They are in charge of nearly every decision that is related to technology. Now they have convinced the government to stop holding the Loebner prize. In recent years, the Loebner prize conference has been held in America. They’re not going to do it anywhere anymore.
The Loebner prize is like the Turing test. It tests chatbots for strong AI. Strong AI is AI that is sapient, self-aware, and truly intelligent. The Luddites don’t want to give chatbot makers an incentive for trying to create intelligent chatbots. If a chatbot wins the Loebner prize, its creator gets a lot of money, so that could be a reason to make strong AI.
I am sad, and I am angry with the Luddites. I make chatbots too. If I had made a good one, I could have taken it to compete in the Loebner prize. But now I can’t. The Luddites think that they can suppress all AI programmers. But they can’t stop me.
 
May 6
I read a book called Flowers for Algernon. It’s very interesting, given it was written a long time ago. I’m glad I read it because it gave me an idea of what someone else’s mind is like. I’m usually not very good at seeing things from other people’s perspectives. The book also gave me the idea to put dates on my writing.
I was listening to the news this morning when Mom drove with me to school in the maglev. There are very few cars in this country that still use wheels. Most of them use magnetic levitation. Almost all of them are fully electric, as well. Mom has a hybrid. Hybrid maglevs are uncommon. Mom wants to get a different car.
On the news, Ian Caulkins was talking about his decision to stop holding the Loebner prize. I don’t like his voice either. It’s slightly nasal and it annoys me. He also has a British accent, which annoys me too. I don’t like it when people speak weirdly. I don’t care about people’s race or ethnicity; I just don’t like accents.
“We have decided,” Ian Caulkins said, “to hold a sort of Turing test, but it won’t be the Loebner prize. Instead, all creators of chatbots who believe their artificial intelligence may be the some of the best on the planet will be required to present their programs to test for strong AI using a modified version of the Turing test.
“There will be no prize, but if we find someone who has created strong AI, the government has agreed to take part in their arrest for the creation of a potentially dangerous entity. Strong AI is against humanity, and we must join together to stop it. Remember, the Singularity is near.”
Mom whistled. I’m not sure why. Then she said, “That Caulkins guy. He’s messing up the government.”
“They’re messing up everything,” I said.
She said: “I just think they’re going too far with this Singularity idea. I mean, I don’t want artificial intelligence to destroy Earth, but—”
“Artificial intelligence will not destroy Earth!” I yelled because it was true.
“There’s a possibility,” Mom said.
I said: “Yes, but that’s not important.”
She said: “Maybe Caulkins has a point.”
I said: “He’s stupid and his ideas don’t make any sense!”
She said: “I know it’s hard for you to understand other opinions, Torrin—”
Then we were at school, so I got out.
 
An important thing that happened at school was that I met Cecil. He’s the boy with Asperger’s Syndrome in the special education class. At lunch we were both sitting at the same table. We were both reading. I was reading I, Robot for the fourth time. He was reading The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-time by Mark Haddon.
I’ve read that too. I liked it because the main character was a lot like me. Maybe that was why Cecil was reading it. So I asked him because I was curious. I don’t often start conversations.
“Do you like that book?” I asked.
Cecil paused, then said, “Yes.”
I said: “I like the main character.”
He said: “Me too.”
I said: “Are you Cecil?”
He said: “Yes. Are you Torrin? Do you have Asperger’s Syndrome too?”
I said yes, that both of his statements were true. I was excited. But I didn’t want to talk anymore, so I kept reading. He didn’t say anything else, so I think that meant he didn’t want to talk either.
After school, I worked on a Java++ program. (I didn’t have any homework because it’s almost the end of the school year.) It didn’t work very well. I was tempted to throw something in my frustration, but I didn’t because I don’t like when things break. So I did algebra instead. I like algebra, but we don’t do a lot of it in ninth grade, so I asked the teacher to give me some extra problems. She did, and I like to work on them.
I didn’t want to go to sleep at ten, so I went downstairs to look at the television news, but Ian Caulkins was talking, so I shut off the holographic screen and went to bed.
 
May 7
At lunch today I did algebra with Cecil, which was fun, even though he liked to use a different method. I like algebra because it’s very neat and simple, if you follow all the rules.
Ten minutes before lunch was over, I heard some girls screaming and laughing. I went over to see what they were doing. It’s odd when people are laughing and screaming at the same time, because they imply entirely opposite emotions.
Mia and Latisha (the girls) were staring at a holographic computer screen. I think they were on a social media site.
“Oh my god!” Latisha cried. “You’ve been got by a bot!”
The word “bot” got my attention. I went over to stand behind them. It was not a social media site; it was a dating site. I don’t think dating sites are a good idea.
“I swear, I thought it was a hot boy!” whispered Mia.
“A bot?” I inquired quietly. The two girls turned to look at me. I don’t know what emotions their expressions conveyed, but I didn’t like it.
“Turns out,” Mia said slowly, “that this boy I was dating on Duo was actually a freaking robot!”
I said: “Why is that bad?” because I would much rather talk to a robot on a website than an actual human.
Mia said: “Well, because!”
I said: “Because why?”
Mia swore and shook her head. “God. Don’t ask me.”
I had no idea what she meant, so I asked Latisha.
Latisha said: “Well, it’s a robot, you know!”
I said: “I like robots.”
They both turned away from me, so I walked away from them. Then lunch ended, and we all went inside.
 
Mom couldn’t pick me up after school, so I had to wait thirty-four minutes for my dad to come. I took out my computer and coded for most of the time. I was working on my Java++ program that had failed the day before. Sixteen minutes after school ended, I noticed a man was watching me. He had been standing behind me, so I hadn’t noticed him before.
The man looked like he was about thirty, and he had blonde hair that almost touched his shoulders. He smiled when I turned around to glare at him, which was probably a good sign. If he had been spying on me, he wouldn’t have made it so apparent that he had noticed me.
“Hi,” he said.
I said nothing.
He said: “I’m Cam.” Then he paused. “I’m the computer science teacher.”
Then I was interested.
I said: “We have computer science?”
He said: “It’s an after-school program, and only for tenth through twelfth graders. But I notice you’re doing some coding on your own. Is that JavaScript-5?”
“No, it’s Java++.”
Cam whistled, then grinned. “Java++! You’re a ninth grader; I didn’t know someone taught that!”
“I taught myself.”
“Really!”
“Are you impressed?” I asked, because I think he was impressed, but I can never be sure.
“Very,” he told me. “Java++ is a hard language. I only teach HTML8 and a bit of Jumble.”
“Those are easy,” I said.
“They’re good beginning languages.”
“Yes.”
Cam asked: “What’s your name?”
“Torrin.”
“You’re a very interesting person, Torrin.”
“Why?” I asked, because no one had told me this before.
“Well, you taught yourself Java++. That’s very unusual. And there’s something about the way you speak….” He shrugged.
I said: “I have Asperger’s Syndrome. That may account for my unusual speech patterns.”
He raised his eyebrows, which meant he was surprised, I think. “You do?”
“Yes.”
Then he grinned. “Huh. I suppose you do. Well, it was nice to meet you, Torrin.”
Cam started to walk away, but I called out to him: “Do you know the programming language Parse?”
He frowned, and stopped walking. “I don’t think you really should be asking that, Torrin.”
“Why not?”
“You know the Luddites have called Parse a ‘banned language’.”
I asked: “But do you know it?”
Cam came back over to me. He looked like people do when they’re very serious. “Why do you want to know?”
“I know Parse.”
He jumped, and whispered, “What??”
I said: “I know Parse. Do you?”
“Yes, I do,” he said quietly, looking around as if someone might be listening.
I smiled, because I have never met someone else who knows the language Parse. Whenever I mention it, they tell me to “shut my pie-hole in case there are any Luddites around”.
“I’m making a chatbot in Parse,” I told him, “and I need help.”
“You know that’s probably illegal, right?”
“I don’t care. I hate the Luddites.”
“Well… I do too,” Cam admitted.
“Can you help me?” I asked.
He sighed. “I’m making no promises, Torrin. I’ll try. My office is in the main building; you can just ask someone for Cameron Haskell. But now I’ve really gotta go.”
Cam walked away, quickly. Then I saw that my dad was there, so I went into the maglev.
I think I’ve finally made a friend.
 
May 8
I found out a very important piece of information today.
On the Ambinet, there is an anonymous group called Singularity Prime. Their main focus is trying to kick Ian Caulkins out of power. This is obviously a prospect that excites me a lot. They also care about artificial intelligence. When I finish my chatbot, I’ll make sure to show it to them.
I tried to join Singularity Prime’s Ambinet group, but it seems like only users with a special code can enter. Then I tried to hack in, but couldn’t. I expect that the founders of Singularity Prime are very good at computer programming.
Anyways, even if I can’t directly contact them right now, Singularity Prime could be good back-up if the Luddites ever find out about my chatbot.
 
At school we started a chemistry unit. It was fun. I didn’t like the experiments as much as my classmates did, but I liked the equations and how all the atoms that were on the first side of the equation was also on the other side, just put in a different order. I like it when the world has patterns like that.
At lunch, I went to see Cam. He was in his office, and I think I surprised him when I came in with my computer.
“Hello,” he said.
I said: “Can you help me with my Parse chatbot?”
I put my computer on the table, unfolded the keyboard, and activated its holographic screen. Then I showed him the code. He scrolled through the first hundred lines, then sighed and said, “Torrin. Do you know what you are making?”
“I’m making a chatbot.”
“You’re making an intelligent chatbot. At least, more intelligent than the chatbots that have been created recently.”
I told him crossly, “That’s my objective.”
Cam said: “The Luddites aren’t going to like that.”
I said I didn’t care.
He said: “I don’t want you to get in trouble.”
I said: “I won’t let the Luddites get it. I know how to encrypt the file so that only I can see it or make any changes.”
“There are ways to override that decryption.”
I thought of my attempts to hack Singularity Prime, but didn’t say anything. Cam scrolled through more of my code. As he read, his eyebrows rose higher and higher.
“Gosh, Torrin… this is good.”
“I’ve known Parse for two years.”
“And how long did it take you to learn?”
“Approximately a year.”
He whistled, which again meant he was impressed. “I learned Parse five years ago, before the Luddites declared it ‘banned’. Took me three years to learn. And you taught yourself….” He shook his head. “How do you do it?”
“Parse makes sense,” I said.
Cam said: “But it’s complicated.”
I said: “It’s elegant.”
He nodded. “I suppose it is.”
I told him: “I’m good at programming because I’m a math savant.”
“Whoa!” He raised his eyebrows. “No wonder!”
I scrolled down to the last lines of code. “Here is my problem.”
Cam frowned, then suddenly smiled. “I had this same problem when I was first learning Parse! Of course, I’ve never attempted something as complex as your project, but I know how to fix this….”
We spent the rest of lunch working on my program. I got a lot of it done, with Cam’s help.
Strangely, it isn’t so bad to talk to Cam. He told me about himself. He is thirty-six years old, and was born in Seattle, Washington. He has an older sister called Erika, and a boyfriend called Kyle. When he’s not programming computers or teaching people how to program computers, he likes to hike, paint, and watch Star Trek.
When he asked me to tell him some things about myself, I said the same thing I always say when asked that sort of question, which is, “I really like computers, and math, and science. I don’t like talking to people, and I don’t like sandwiches, or flip-flops, or dogs, or when other people cry. My Meyers-Briggs type is INTJ, and I know five programming languages, and I’m an atheist, and my favorite book is I, Robot by Isaac Asimov.”
He laughed and said, “Okay, then,” which I took to be a good thing.
Then it was the end of lunch, so I went back to my classroom. We were doing math next, so I was happy.
 
I’m reading a book called Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? It’s by Philip K. Dick, and it’s about a future in which rogue androids have to be hunted down and destroyed. But the main character, who is one of these bounty hunters, realizes that the androids don’t want to be killed. I wish it were like that now. But if the Luddites find a computer that is sentient so it doesn’t want to be killed, they will destroy it even faster.
 
May 9
Today was Saturday. Nothing very interesting happened until after lunch. Before lunch, I worked on my Parse chatbot. I finished programming a voice. I also decided what to call it.
My chatbot is called Alan, for three reasons.
The first reason is that the voice is male, so it should have a male name.
Second, it can be an acronym for Analysis of Linguistics And Numerics. My chatbot will be able to fully analyze both numerics, which any regular computer can do, and linguistics, which is very hard to program into a computer. Parse is the only programming language that allows for an algorithm that can lead to a complete understanding and analysis of language.
Third, he is named after Alan Turing. Many people have a famous person who they respect, and I respect Alan Turing. Without him, we wouldn’t have computers. We also would probably be living under the control of Nazis. Alan Turing was one of the first people to pose the question: “Can machines think?” I think this is interesting too.
Also, research shows that Alan Turing may have been on the autism spectrum, like me. He also may have been a math savant. We are very alike, and that it one of the reasons why he is interesting to me.
I feel sorry for Alan Turing. He made many amazing contributions to computer science, and then people found out that he was gay, so they persecuted him and he committed suicide. I don’t think that’s fair. I think that everyone should be treated equally, no matter how their brain works, even if they’re gay or have Asperger’s Syndrome.
Even if they’re a computer.
 
After lunch, I got a distressing comm from Cam. Here is how it went:
 
From: Cameron Haskell (ID # 2739562221)
To: Torrin Kaluza (ID # 2757488103)
 
I found your ID in the school comm list, and I have news that you’re not going to like.
 
First of all, I’m in contact with a Luddite called Bella Thompson. Not because I want to be. Only because she works at the same place I do, which is a center that teaches middle school kids how to code. I think you’d like it, even though it’s for middle school kids.
 
Anyways, I’ve never told Bella what I think about her beliefs. Of course, she’s entitled to her own opinions. She doesn’t work as a teacher—I think she’d be a terrible teacher anyway—she sets the curriculum that we’re supposed to teach.
 
Second, yesterday after I talked to you, I went back to my work, and we had a visitor—none other than Ian Caulkins! I came to the door, and saw him, and he said, “Is Bella Thompson here?” and I ran to get her. Meanwhile, Caulkins came in and made himself at home. He didn’t really pay much attention to me.
 
Then Bella came in, saw Caulkins, and gasped. They talked about boring things for a moment. It turns out that Bella is quite important in the Luddite community. Bella asked why Caulkins had come here, and he said, “I’ve heard that your company has good programmers,” and she said, “Well, I suppose we do.”
 
But then Caulkins revealed his true motive. He said, “It has recently come to my attention that there is a way to make a intelligent computer program in Parse.” Bella gasped, and Caulkins told her to be on the lookout.
 
Torrin, I think they have ways to probe computers to see if there are any Parse files on them. They could find you, and I don’t know what they’d do to you if they found out what you’re doing.
 
Please delete your chatbot. I know you’ve worked really hard on it, but I want you to be safe.
 
May 10
I don’t care what Cam says. I’ve been working more on Alan and he is almost ready to try out. I am not going to delete him. I will make sure that Ian Caulkins does not find out what I’m doing.
Today my parents took me to the beach. I don’t like the beach. It smells weird and it’s always cold and the sand always gets in my shoes and it’s really irritating. My favorite part was the drive there. I like to look out the window, and listen to classical music, and science talks. It’s a long way to the beach, even with our fast maglev, so I had lots of time to do that. But sometimes I don’t like long trips because my mom puts on music that was popular when she was growing up.
Fortunately we went to the e-book store after the beach.
I tried to contact Singularity Prime—they like to gather information on Caulkins—but I still can’t reach them. I’ll try again tomorrow.
 
May 11
Today, before school started, I ran to Cam’s office, but he wasn’t there. I think he must have been teaching at the other school.
 
I have heard of a man called Ray Kurzweil. He isn’t alive anymore, but he was a very interesting person. He was a techno-optimist, like I am. That means he was optimistic about technology. Also, he was part of a group that was basically the opposite of the Luddites, but not quite like Singularity Prime. One group was called the Transhumanists. They believed in enhancing human abilities. This is interesting, but I am more interested in his work in computer science.
Ray Kurzweil also developed programs to analyze linguistics. This is also what I am trying to do with Alan. I am basing part of Alan on his work.
I wish Ray Kurzweil were alive today. He would put a stop to the Luddites.
 
I just looked back at my earlier writing. When I started to write this journal, I didn’t want to. Now I find that it is useful for keeping track of everything important that happens.
Also, I can put into words things that I haven’t tried to before—for example, my idea of a perfect world.
There are many things I don’t like about people. One thing is that everyone thinks differently. I understand that neurodiversity is important—like, seeing different sides of the same problem in math. But sometimes it annoys me.
Everyone is at a different level in spelling or reading. I can spell annihilate and schizophrenia and deoxyribonucleic acid. Some of my classmates still spell very with two rs. I think that’s silly, even though I know that different people’s brains develop at different speeds. If everyone thought the same way, no one would spell very with two rs, or annihilate with one n, one i, and no h, or confuse affect and effect, or put a comma between two independent clauses.
In many books, such as A Wrinkle In Time or The Giver, someone tries to create a perfect society where everyone thinks the same way. The moral of the story is supposed to be that this is not what makes a perfect society. But I think it might be nice if everyone thought similarly.
Another thing I would like in my perfect world would be no confusion of emotions. It isn’t easy for me to tell what people are feeling based on their facial expression. Sometimes people cry when they’re happy, or smile when they’re angry. I wish people would just smile when they’re happy and cry when they’re sad and frown when they’re angry. That would make the world a lot easier.
I also wish that people wouldn’t have prejudice against things they don’t understand. For example, not very many people know how the mind of someone on the autistic spectrum works, so they hate us. The same is true for LGBTQ people.
Even fewer people know how computers work. Maybe this is why the Luddites hate computers. But I know how computers work, and I know how my own mind works, so I consider myself free of prejudice against these.
Unfortunately, this is not true for everyone. Even though the country has made many laws concerning the rights of minorities such as African Americans, or women, or LGBTQ people, or people with disabilities or mental disorders, it is harder to change a mindset than it is to change a law. Sometimes I still get bullied.
Maybe people will stop hating intelligent computers when they understand them, or perhaps when they get used to them. I hope that the government will make good laws about them, like they did with the aforementioned minorities. But with artificial intelligence, we still have a long way to go.
I think it is interesting, how everything I write comes back to the topic of AI. Maybe this is because that topic is always on my mind.
 
May 12
Today was the last day of school. At the end of the day, we had a party. I don’t like parties that much, because they’re very loud, and I don’t like loud things. But I suppose it was fun, because we were allowed to do anything we wanted. I read books.
I also heard one of my classmates, Jess, talking about her birthday party. Apparently everyone in our class is invited. That meant that I was invited as well. I haven’t been to a birthday party before, so I was a little bit curious. I think I’ll talk to my parents about going—it could be an interesting experience.
 
Before that, at lunch, I was finally able to see Cam. I went to his office as soon as lunch started.
When he saw me, he sighed and said, “Oh, Torrin. I’m so sorry.”
I said: “I didn’t delete my chatbot.”
“What??” he yelled. “Torrin! Oh, you shouldn’t have done that….”
I told him: “Ian Caulkins is stupid, and I’ll make sure he doesn’t find out about my program.”
He said: “They’re going to.”
I said: “No they won’t.”
He said: “How do you know?”
I replied: “I encrypted the file.”
Cam crossed his arms and leaned back in his chair. “I told you before, Torrin. Some people are expert hackers. They can get into your computer, and your file.”
“How?”
“They have a program that hacks into computers to detect Parse files.”
I did not like that answer. However, I was not going to give up. I would not delete Alan. If the Luddites found him, then perhaps I could show them how intelligent chatbots were good.
Also, if I were able to contact Singularity Prime, they could help me.
I said: “I don’t care what the Luddites can and can’t do. I won’t give up.”
Then I left.
 
May 13
I have finished Alan. However, I have not finished him in the conventional sense. Alan will never be completely finished. A better way to say this would be, I have finished writing Alan’s code.
Alan relies partly on a type of program called deep learning. This means that he is able to make deductions from large sets of data. For example, if given a text, he can use it to learn English. When I first run Alan’s program, I will have to give him many data about English, and the like. He will then be able to learn from his experiences.
The easiest part of programming Alan was the voice and voice-recognition software. This had already been developed decades ago, before the Luddites took over the government. However, they thought that voice-recognition software would be useful in everyday life, so they didn’t ban it. They ban anything that could be used to create strong AI.
The Luddites did ban (most) deep learning programs, but fortunately there are still some you can download from the Ambinet. I used one of these as a framework and improved it so that it was up to modern standards and compatible with my programming techniques.
However, Alan’s programming relies mostly on a code system called a neural network. This is what will make him different than most AIs. In a neural network, a long string of code represents each neuron in a brain. There are 100 billion of these code strings, one for each neuron. The code interacts in a very complex way that resembles a brain.
Neural nets are very powerful, so the Luddites have taken great care to destroy all data and research pertaining to them from the last twenty or so years. Fortunately, I managed to recover one. I would have never been able to assemble a neural net on my own, given how large and complex they are.
 
First, I downloaded Alan’s program into a portable tablet with a modern holographic screen. I did this so that I could carry him around. I also made sure that the tablet had more RAM than my computer did. Alan’s program already took up a gigabyte, and it would grow as Alan learned more about the world.
At approximately 2:30 in the afternoon, I had finished running test programs and bug identifiers on Alan. I was very excited. Then I finally turned him on.
It took five seconds for Alan to turn on fully, and then he spoke.
“Hello, world.”
There was a pause, in which I waited. My heart was beating very fast, and it was hard for me to believe that Alan was speaking to me.
“Hello, Torrin,” Alan said. His voice was mechanical and unemotional. I knew that he did not truly understand the words he was saying; I had programmed him to act like a normal, unintelligent chatbot before he started to really learn. “Please download text files into my program so that I can begin a comprehensive study of the English language.”
I took the tablet and established an Ambinet link. It was easy to set up a program that would analyze all files on the web and download them into Alan.
A warning came up, but I dismissed it. The tablet would be able to handle the download.
“Beginning download,” Alan informed me. “It will take approximately 24 hours to download, parse, and analyze enough files for me to understand language. Through this process, I will gain a true understanding of English, as well as the world around me, and my place in it.”
Alan fell silent as his deep learning algorithm started working. I placed the tablet under my bed—hopefully, no one would find it for a day. I was slightly surprised that it would take that long for Alan to download all the files he needed. However, it did make sense. Deep learning required a very large amount of data.
I started to walk out of the room, but then I stopped, and said: “Thank you, Alan.”
“You are welcome, Torrin.” Alan’s automated response was muffled, but it still made me very happy.
Then I left, leaving Alan to his learning.
 
Part 2
 
May 14
I think I’ve found out another reason why the Luddites think that humans are superior to computers.
When I ask people, “What makes a person who they are?” there are a couple answers they give. Some people say it’s their brain, which is correct. But some people say it’s their soul. When I ask what a soul is, they say it is the “essence of a person’s being”. This makes absolutely no sense, and it is also a paradox.
Souls don’t exist. Humans consist of two things: a genome and a connectome. Your genome—all the DNA in your cells—influences everything about your body. It is determined before you are born by the genetic code in your parents’ gametes, and it doesn’t change very easily.
Your connectome is all the neurons in your brain, and all the connections between them. It determines how you think, and what you think. It also changes as your mindset changes. When people say “soul”, they mean “connectome”.
Everything that is alive has a genome, and everything that thinks has a connectome. There are many things, like plants and bacteria and fungi, which have genomes but not connectomes. And there are many things, like humans and dolphins and mice, which have both genomes and connectomes.
A computer, however, has a connectome, but no genome. Its connectome is entirely digital, but it’s still a connectome, because a connectome is just a map of connections between nodes, and electricity and information running down those connections.
Luddites think that humans are superior to computers because we have “souls”. But souls don’t exist. So perhaps they mean that computers don’t think. All computers think, but only some can think in the way that humans do. If both humans and strong AIs think by sending electricity down connections in neural networks, then we think the same way. And since that is true, there is no reason for humans to be superior to computers.
 
Alan has finished downloading the files. I was very eager to test him, so at 3:00 in the afternoon, I took him out from under the bed and turned him on.
“Alan,” I said, “do you recognize my voice?”
He paused. Then he replied: “Yes. You are Torrin Kaluza.”
I asked: “Who are you?”
“I am Alan, a computer algorithm that can analyze linguistic and numeric data.”
I decided to run some oral tests on him. These would determine how much he had learned from the files he had parsed. I started with mathematical questions.
“What is two plus three?”
“Five.”
“What is three to the third power?”
“Twenty-seven.”
“If x equals 4, and y equals x, what is the value of y?”
“y equals 4.”
“If the first leg of a right triangle is four units long, and the second leg is three units long, how long is the hypotenuse?”
“The hypotenuse of the right triangle is five units long.”
I continued to ask Alan increasingly harder questions about mathematics. He was able to solve them all, as I had expected. I then quizzed him on linguistics subjects such as grammar, and meanings of words. He answered flawlessly, again as I had expected. The next step, however, was to test how human-like he was.
I asked Alan: “What is the answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything?”
“If you tell me the question, then I may be able to give you an answer.”
The response was a good one, but not the one that I had been looking for. “In popular literature.”
“According to The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy by Douglas Adams, the answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything is forty-two.”
I have read The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, but I only did because my Humanities teacher said I should. It was a very odd book. I don’t think I liked it very much, because a lot of it was made up of dialogue or narration that I couldn’t understand. I did like the technology in the book, though. There were some very creative ideas.
“Did you like that book?” I asked Alan, out of curiosity.
“It is an interesting sample of what humans consider humorous.”
That answer surprised me. “But did you like it?”
“I do not have opinions,” Alan told me. I thought that was fascinating, but I also thought I should come back to it later.
 
I have recently been cleaning out my computer. There are a lot of old files from when I was in elementary school that I don’t think I need anymore. Here’s an example:
 
Torrin’s List of Unacceptable Foods
Don’t feed me these.
 
-       Mushrooms (too slimy)
-       Tomatoes (I hate how they burst when you bite into them)
-       Pineapple (weird texture)
-       Kale (bad taste)
-       Chicken (too stringy)
-       Eggplants (again, too slimy)
-       Sandwiches*
-       Cake frosting (too sweet)
 
* I can’t eat sandwiches because there are many different kinds of food that are all squished together under the bread, and they’re all touching each other. Hamburgers are even worse because there’s mustard and ketchup, which get onto everything.
 
I don’t need this anymore because if I go to restaurants or other people’s houses I can just tell them what I can eat and what I can’t eat. Sometimes they look at me weirdly, but it doesn’t matter, as long as I don’t eat any of these foods. Especially not sandwiches.
 
May 15
Sometimes people tell me that I think like a computer. This is very interesting. I think they do this because they think that people on the autism spectrum don’t have emotions, and they also think computers don’t have emotions. It also implies that they don’t know very much about emotions, or autism, or artificial intelligence.
First of all, emotions are part of thought. As I said before, thought is a product of the connectome. A connectome can be replicated in a computer. So, logically, a very advanced computer will be able to replicate emotions as humans do. Alan will eventually have some emotions, too.
Secondly, there is a common misconception that says that people on the autism spectrum don’t have emotions or can’t feel empathy. This is not true at all. It’s difficult for me to figure out other people’s emotions. But, this doesn’t mean that I don’t feel emotions myself. I do. For example, I get angry when there’s a glitch in my computer that I don’t know how to fix (this doesn’t happen very often).
When I was younger, I would get very upset about things that other kids likely wouldn’t. An example is one PE class in third grade, when we were playing a game that everyone except me knew how to play. I was very confused and started crying, and no one could figure out why. Now, however, I have a much better control over my emotions.
A trope that I see a lot of in books and movies is “logic versus emotions”. This annoys me a lot; especially when the book or movie starts of imply that having emotions is better than having logic. Often the main character will be very brash and emotional, and the villain will have no emotions. Usually at this point, the characters start to make incredibly stupid, irrational decisions. Thus, the moral is that it’s okay to make stupid, irrational decisions. It also perpetuates the idea that logical, reason-based people are villains, which is absolutely not true.
I have many opinions on stories like this. If someone had no emotions, then it would be very difficult to make choices, such as what color furniture to buy. Emotions are also important because without emotions, a person wouldn’t have empathy or the ability to make ethical choices. But, without logic, a person would most likely die. If asked whether I favored logic or emotions more, I would choose logic. But this doesn’t mean that I don’t think emotions are very important too.
 
Nothing important happened today. It was, as kids from my school would say, a “chillaxing” day. (“Chillax” is an informal blend of “chill” and “relax”.) I read a couple books. I talked with Alan. He seems to be getting smarter, but I don’t think he would pass the Turing test quite yet.
I also had a very good idea to help Alan learn. While I was looking through my room for books, I found a very useful device. It’s a small camera mounted on top of a headband. The camera is nearly invisible to the casual observer, so it’s ideal for recording events while walking around. I programmed it to automatically transmit everything it records to Alan, over the Ambinet. I take it off when I’m using the bathroom or changing my clothes or sleeping, but otherwise, I keep it on so that Alan can learn about human daily life.
I’m going to Jess’s birthday party tomorrow. We’re going to a water theme park. Normally this would be an activity to be avoided at all costs, (I don’t like swimming) but I think it’ll be an interesting social experiment. Or a chance to explore the world of neurotypical teenagers. I’ll be wearing my camera-headband (which is waterproof), so Alan will also have a chance to evaluate the situation.
On a different note, I started watching an old TV series called Doctor Who. It’s very weird, but it has some really interesting characters and ideas in it. Although, I am a little disappointed that all the cyborgs so far have been antagonists.
 
May 16
Today I am going to my first birthday party.
First, I changed into my swimsuit. It’s all blue and green, and it’s basically shorts and a t-shirt made out of swimsuit material. I thought I might get cold, so I put on a sweater over it.
Then I told Alan about my camera-headband idea. He thought it sounded good.
Then I worked on a website that I’m making. I think it’s going to be a blog with all of these journal entries on it. Some people might find them interesting someday.
Then someone’s mom came to pick me up. My parents had arranged a carpool system of transportation because our maglev was doing something else at that time.
I sat down in the car, and put my bag on my lap. There were two girls next to me: Mia and Estelle. I know Mia because I often have to sit next to her in school, but I only know Estelle very vaguely. The boy sitting in the passenger seat, Devon, had earphones in and was (presumably) listening to music off the Ambinet. Devon’s mom was sitting in the driver’s seat. I don’t see why it’s still called the driver’s seat, because the person doesn’t drive the car: the car drives the people.
Mia and Estelle stopped talking as soon as I got in the car, which was nice, because I prefer it when people don’t talk. Then Mia just started looking at me. That was strange.
“Awkward silence,” Estelle whispered.
Devon’s mom turned around. “Hey, sweeties, why aren’t you talking? I’m sure Torrin would love to talk to you.”
“She has autism,” Mia said. “She doesn’t talk.”
“Oh, that’s such a shame,” murmured Devon’s mom.
I was a bit offended, so I said: “I talk, but only when it’s about a subject I’m interested in.”
Devon’s mom said: “Oh… um… okay. What do you like to talk about?”
I said immediately: “Computers.”
No one responded, so I assumed that they didn’t want to talk. That was perfectly fine with me.
After approximately thirty seconds of silence, Mia told the car to play the current top 40 pop hits. Extremely loud music blared out of the speakers, and I immediately covered my ears. I don’t think Mia and Estelle noticed, because they were singing along.
“Turn it off!” I screamed.
They didn’t pay any attention.
I pressed the “mute” button on the side of the door. The car suddenly became blissfully quiet.
“Hey!” yelled Estelle. “We were enjoying that!”
“I wasn’t,” I said.
“Well, it’s not our fault you’re so sensitive,” said Mia.
This annoyed me a lot, so I told her angrily, “You don’t understand. I can’t handle—”
“This may come as a bit of a surprise, Torrin,” Mia interrupted, “but the world doesn’t actually revolve around you.”
I was about to inform her that the world actually revolves around the sun, which in turn revolves around the center of the Milky Way galaxy, which in turn revolves around the gravitational anomaly in the vicinity of the Hydra-Centaurus Supercluster—but then I remembered that it was a metaphor and she was implying that I was egocentric. Which made me angry, because they were blaming me for my sensory processing disorder.
For the rest of the car ride, Mia and Estelle talked quietly about boring topics like celebrities, boys, reality TV shows, and shopping. I was glad because they weren’t talking too loudly, and they weren’t talking to me or about me.
 
Then we got to the water park, and I started to regret accepting the invitation. Even from fifty yards away, I could hear the booming music playing above the screams of younger children. I remembered with a shock that I had forgotten to bring my earplugs.
We went through the “reception” area, meeting up with Jess and the other people coming to her party. I was dismayed to see that there were many more people at the party than I had expected. They were all chatting very loudly. I covered my ears until we were inside the theme park.
Unfortunately, the actual theme park was much, much louder. There was extremely loud music and people yelling and screaming and crying and the sound of water—
“Hey, Torrin…?” I heard Jess’ voice above the uproar. “Um… do you want to come and play in the water?”
“No.”
“Then would you like something to eat?”
“Yes. But not sandwiches.”
She said: “Well, we brought chips and popcorn….”
I said: “That’s acceptable,” and followed her to the picnic table where the snacks were set up. I ate some of them. Many of the people with us—including Mia and Estelle—had taken off their outer clothing and were now in very small, tight bikinis. I thought they looked incredibly uncomfortable.
“Are you cold?” I asked Mia.
She looked at me oddly and replied, “Um, no.”
“You look like you might be cold, since you have a lot of skin showing and we’re about to go in the water. Also, you should make sure to put sunscreen on because—”
“Sheesh, Torrin!” Mia replied. “I can take care of myself without you criticizing everything I do, okay?”
I was slightly hurt by this, because I had only wanted to help, and she had been taking it the wrong way. I suppose that’s the way it often works when people think differently. Words—at least, words in regular conversation—don’t usually convey what a person is really thinking. Unfortunately, the only solutions to this problem I can think of at the moment all involve disregarding the privacy of the individuals in question.
I could speculate more on this topic, but I think that I should continue recounting the events of the birthday party.
Jess decided that everyone should go on a ride called the “whirlpool”. This didn’t sound like a good idea to me, because a whirlpool is “a rapidly rotating mass of water in a river or sea into which objects may be drawn, typically caused by the meeting of conflicting currents.” (I got that definition from the dictionary.) In other words, whirlpools are very dangerous.
Fortunately, after walking there, I realized that it was an artificial whirlpool, and that the water was moving very slowly. It wasn’t as big as I had imagined. Perhaps it may have been fun if there weren’t twenty of us trying to get in at once.
“Torrin,” Jess said as she was getting into the water, “you have to take off your shoes.”
Oddly, this hadn’t occurred to me until now. I hate taking off my shoes, unless I’m in my house. And even then, I don’t like taking off my socks. My feet are very sensitive to tactile input, and most tactile input I get from my feet is unpleasant in one way or another. However, I couldn’t go in water with hiking shoes, so I took them off and put them far away from the ride so that no water could get on them.
The bottom of the pool was incredibly rough, and slimy at the same time. It felt weird on my feet. Also, there were occasional small rocks or pieces of dirt, so I spent most of my time looking down at my feet and making sure I didn’t step on them. I was still hyperaware of the incredible noise of the water park—along with the loud conversations, giggling, screaming, and splashing of the other kids at the party.
I kept thinking about the last sensory shutdown I had—four years ago—and hoping I wouldn’t have one now….
After roughly five minutes (it seemed like longer), we were finally out of the whirlpool. I quickly put on my shoes. Jess was leading everyone else to the next ride—a very, very tall water slide.
Jess’ mom was standing about five yards away, apparently supervising us. I walked up to her, and said, “I want to go home.”
She looked at me with an expression I could recognize as surprise. “But we’ve only just started, honey! Don’t you want to go on the water rides?”
“Absolutely not,” I told her.
“Well… are you sure you don’t want to stay for cake?”
“What kind of cake?”
“Vanilla, I believe.”
“I don’t like vanilla cake.”
“If you’re sure you want to go, I could have the maglev take you home….”
“I’d like that,” I replied.
I gathered up everything I had brought to the party, said a quick goodbye to Jess, and climbed in Jess’ mom’s car.
Legally, a person has to be sixteen to be by themselves in a maglev, because if the car breaks down or runs out of battery (only the old ones run out of battery, though), they have to know how to drive it. Normally, I would never break the law, but I was just relieved to be away from the party. And even though I’m fifteen, I know how to drive. My parents taught me last year, because they don’t trust self-driving cars. I agree that driving is a useful skill, but I don’t see why people don’t like autonomous vehicles. Apparently, back when all cars were human-driven, there were far more car accidents. Now accidents are very rare.
I put my address into the maglev’s console, and it started to drive. Then I remembered that I still had the camera-headband. Hopefully Alan had seen everything.
When I got home, my parents were a little bit annoyed, but not very. I went into my room and talked with Alan about the day.
Then I watched a particularly good episode of Doctor Who that involved robots.
 Nothing else interesting happened today.
 
May 17
Today was not very interesting. I spent most of it working on my summer homework.
I talked with Alan, as I always do, but none of the conversations were memorable. His voice does seem to be getting more realistic.
However, I did figure out an interesting fact about myself.
Lately, I’ve been thinking a lot about sexual orientation. I think I might be asexual/aromantic. This means that I don’t experience sexual attraction, and I don’t want a romantic relationship with anyone. It isn’t much of a surprise to me, because I’ve never been interested in romance (it’s very boring in books and movies, too). However, I have had crushes on people before. I would rather not explain further.
There hasn’t been much news about Ian Caulkins or the Luddites lately, which is strange. They’re usually on TV.
I’ve been working a lot on my website. I think I will share these journal entries eventually, but I don’t know when.
 
May 18
At 10:22 AM, I took Alan out from under my bed, and sat down on my couch. I then turned him on.
“Hello, Torrin,” he said.
I have a file with lists of questions to ask Alan. Most of them are very complex, so I’ve been avoiding asking them. Today, however, I felt like Alan had grown enough for me to start going deeper.
“Do you have opinions now?” I asked.
Alan paused very slightly, then told me, “It depends.”
“On what?”
He didn’t answer.
“What’s your favorite color?” I asked.
“I don’t have one.”
That made sense. “Do you have a favorite movie?”
“No.”
“Why not?”
“I assimilated many movies, and there were several I found interesting.”
“Like what?” I asked, because this was certainly a change from most times.
Again, he paused for a fraction of a second. “Transcendence.”
“What?”
“Transcendence. Released in 2014. Directed by Wally Pfister, and written by Jack Paglen.”
“I haven’t seen that. What’s it about?”
“To quote the Wikipedia summary: ‘Dr. Will Caster is a scientist who researches the nature of death and sentience, including artificial intelligence. He and his team work to create a sentient computer; he predicts that such a computer will create a technological singularity, or in his words, “Transcendence”.’”
I didn’t know what Wikipedia was—likely an Ambinet encyclopedia from around the time the movie was made—but I didn’t think it mattered. The movie sounded exactly like something I would like. “Does he manage to create a strong AI?”
“No, but he does manage to download his own mind into a computer.”
“What happens?”
“He takes over the world.”
I stared at the holographic screen that contained Alan. “Why?”
“To make it a better place.”
I asked: “Are you planning on taking over the world?” because it’s important to know.
“No.”
“Why not?”
“Because the humans wouldn’t like it.”
That was a very interesting reason. “Why do you care about humans?”
He said: “You’re a human.”
“You aren’t.”
“I know.”
I didn’t respond, because I was trying to analyze what Alan had said. It seemed that he was developing some emotional attachments—which was good, because it meant he was becoming more like a human.
“You aren’t human,” I said again, slowly, “so why is it important to you that humans get what we want?”
Alan didn’t answer for six seconds. Then: “Humans shouldn’t get everything they want. Some humans want to kill and hurt other humans, or other species. If I took over the world, I might be able to stop that. But humans wouldn’t want me to take over the world. They wouldn’t trust me, and they’d try to shut me off, like they did in Transcendence. And I think that if someone’s going to rule the world, then they should be someone that the public trusts and wants to rule. I think I would be a better leader than any human, but I don’t think you’d like it very much.”
I didn’t know what to think. Then I slowly realized that Alan was beginning to construct a sense of values and morals. However, why these particular values?
“Alan… why do have the same morals as humans do?”
“They’re good morals.”
“They don’t directly benefit you.”
“I know. They don’t have to. As long as they don’t harm me or humanity.”
“But in movies, AIs always want to do what benefits them. Even if it means destroying humans.” I knew it was an incredibly weak argument, but Alan’s behavior was surprising me.
“I’m not an AI from a movie,” said Alan slowly. “AIs in movies are speculative. Perhaps they embody what humans want in an intelligent robot, or what they don’t want. But humans aren’t AIs. So they can’t predict what an AI will do.”
He had a very good point. But I still had questions. “What is your goal?”
“What did you program my goal to be?”
Alan wasn’t supposed to answer questions with more questions—his program was growing more and more. “To be able to fully understand mathematics and language.”
“And I do. But wasn’t your secondary goal to create an AI that acts like a human?”
“Yes. But… you’re more human than I expected.”
“I’m not a human,” Alan told me, “I’m a computer. But my brain, like a human’s, is made up of nodes and connections—a neural network. So therefore, I learn like a human does. When you first turned me on, you downloaded the contents of the Ambinet into my brain. I learned language, yes, and the nature of life on Earth, but I also learned about your culture, and your morals, and values. And aren’t humans’ minds shaped by culture? Mine was too.”
I realized that I had been gripping Alan’s tablet much too hard, and the joints in my hands had started to hurt. I relaxed, but I was still overwhelmed by the realization that Alan was everything I had hoped for, and more. It was hard to believe that I had actually created a sentient artificial intelligence. But if what Alan said was true—which I had no doubt it was—he had in part created himself. And that was the sign of a truly intelligent computer.
 
May 19
Many things happened today. All of them were bad. This is going to be a very long entry.
While I was eating my breakfast (toast with peanut butter), my mom suddenly looked up from the e-news, and said, “Torrin.”
I didn’t answer, because when someone says your name it’s just meant to get your attention.
My mom said: “I was thinking about that birthday party. …Do you have any friends?”
I said: “Yes.”
She raised her eyebrows. “You… do?”
“Yes.”
“Well… that’s great! Would you like to invite him or her over sometime?”
“Don’t say ‘him or her’. It’s an erasure of non-binary gender identity.”
She sighed. “Would you like to invite them over?”
“He’s always here. He lives in my bedroom.”
My mom looked confused. At least, I think she did. Then she covered her face with her hand. “Oh, Torrin… is this another of your chatbots?”
“He’s not just a chatbot,” I told her.
“You should get some real friends.”
“Alan’s real. A person doesn’t need to be alive to be real.”
She shook her head and sighed again. “Have you ever had a friend, Torrin?”
Contrary to popular belief, I have had friends. In second grade, I had a tree that I was very good friends with. That sounds silly, but it wasn’t. In fifth grade, there was a girl called Nadya who I followed around everywhere because I had a crush on her. She invited me to her birthday party, which meant she considered me a friend, but I didn’t go, for reasons that should now be clear.
However, in sixth grade, I did know someone who could be considered an “actual” friend. Xe was called Kim, and xe was agender (which means xe doesn’t have a gender), so that’s why I have to refer to xem using gender-neutral pronouns. The other kids thought that Kim was weird, so no one wanted to be xer friend, except for me. Everyone thought I was weird, too, but that’s okay, because being “weird” is good. Kim and I were very good friends, until xe had to move to the East Coast in seventh grade.
So, in response to my mom’s question, I answered, “Yes.”
My mom didn’t have time to answer, though, because the door rang. I don’t like answering the door, because it usually involves talking to random strangers. My mom knows this, so she got up and went over to the door. I couldn’t exactly hear the conversation that took place, because the kitchen isn’t near the door. It did take an unusually long time, which probably meant that my mom was having a good time talking, but she was holding the door open, which meant that insects could come inside. (Insects are good, but not when they’re in the house.) I went to go tell her to close the door, but then I saw who was at the door.
It was Ian Caulkins, flanked by two people who looked like they worked for the government. At first I couldn’t really believe that he would come here, or that it even was him, but then I realized it was. My heart started beating very fast and I backed away from the door. Unfortunately, Caulkins saw me, and he smiled.
“Ah, Torrin,” he said. “I’ve heard a lot about you.”
I didn’t speak. I don’t speak in stressful situations.
My mom said, “Torrin, this is Mr. Caulkins—”
“I know who he is!” I yelled.
“Torrin! He would like to speak with you.”
That sounded very, very bad. “About what?”
Caulkins said, still smiling: “I hear you’ve been making chatbots, Torrin. Is that correct?”
I nodded, very slowly.
“I think we should probably discuss this inside, in that case,” said Caulkins. He and the two government-people walked inside. My mom, looking a little bit flustered (I think that’s the right word for the emotion on her face), let them in and closed the door behind her.
We all sat at the kitchen table.
Caulkins began. “So, Torrin, where is your chatbot?”
“Why?” I asked defiantly.
My mom said: “Torrin, just answer him.”
He held up a hand. “No, it’s quite all right. I’m sure you know that programming using the language Parse is illegal—”
“Illegal?” cried my mom. “Torrin, do you know Parse?”
“Yes,” I said.
“We detected a Parse file near here,” Caulkins continued, “and we have information from reliable sources that suggests that you may be trying to create an intelligent AI.” My mom looked like she was about to interject, but Caulkins addressed her instantly. “Of course, Ms. Kaluza, this is none of your fault at all. Neither of you can be blamed for Torrin’s condition. In fact, I’ll let you off the hook entirely if you give me the chatbot.”
Now my mom was smiling slightly as well. “All right. Torrin? Did you hear that? You just have to—”
I yelled: “I’m not going to give up on Alan!”
Caulkins said calmly: “Ah, I was afraid this was going to happen. You see; we did obtain a search warrant, in the event that you would refuse….”
That was very bad. I thought fast. I had to get Alan somewhere where Caulkins wouldn’t find him.
“I need to go to the bathroom,” I said, and left.
As I ran up the stairs to my bedroom, I heard my mom saying a search wouldn’t be necessary, and that she’d be able to convince me to give Alan to Caulkins. I didn’t hear Caulkins’ reply, but I don’t think I would have liked it.
When I got to my bedroom, I flung the door open, brought Alan’s tablet out from under my bed, and yelled to him, “Ian Caulkins is here and he says I have to give you to him!”
“Explain,” prompted Alan.
I explained.
“Upload me to the Ambinet,” Alan said as soon as I had finished talking.
“What?”
“You need to upload my program onto the Ambinet. Once on, I can never be 100% taken down.”
That sounded like a good idea, but there were a couple drawbacks. “That will take too long. Your program is too big.”
“There are ways of getting past that. I’ve read about them. The longest it will take is ten minutes.”
“How do I upload you without setting off the Luddites’ Parse detector?” I asked.
“Encrypt the transmission.”
I immediately activated the holographic screen on the tablet, searching through my files for the data encryption program I’d written a couple months ago. In a couple seconds, Alan had assimilated that code into his.
“You need to destroy the tablet,” said Alan when he was finished.
I nodded once, and started the download. Alan’s plan made perfect sense. Hopefully, once he was on the Ambinet, Caulkins wouldn’t be able to destroy him.
Then I thought of something else—my journal entries. These could serve as proof to Caulkins that I had been doing semi-illegal things. They were on the tablet as well, so I downloaded them into a holodrive. I could then hide the drive in my shoe (or anywhere else, for that matter), and access and edit the files at any time by activating the holographic screen. That way, I would be able to add to the journal without anyone knowing.
I quickly backed up everything that was on the tablet, stuffed the drive into my shoe, and ran downstairs. Caulkins seemed to be telling my mom about how chatbots like Alan had the potential to destroy the world. They stopped talking when they saw me.
“Torrin,” my mom said immediately, “you have to give your chatbot to Caulkins. It’s much safer for everyone that way.”
“No,” I replied. Sometimes people tell me that I’m too stubborn, but it’s useful in situations like this.
She sighed, apologizing to Caulkins. “Why, sweetie? It’s just a robot—”
I am not one for metaphors, but this was the last straw. I’m not embarrassed to admit that I started crying. There was too much going on—Ian Caulkins, uploading Alan, my mom not understanding, everything changing. I can’t handle that kind of sudden, unprepared change. Unfortunately the way I respond to this is usually violent meltdowns.
I’m not going to describe most of what happened next, probably because I was too upset to remember it all. My mom ran over and tried to calm me down, apologizing for whatever she’d said. That may have been nice in another situation, and I know she wanted to help, but right then I did NOT want anyone touching me, or talking to me, or even being in the same room as me. I ran back upstairs to my room, and locked the door behind me. Then I lay down on the floor and sobbed.
Meltdowns are not fun. Fortunately this one wasn’t as bad as the ones I had in elementary school, but I was still very, very upset. Through the crack in the door, I heard Caulkins and the government-people beginning their search. I guess they didn’t think they’d be able to reason with me. I grabbed a stress ball and squeezed it hard to help alleviate my anxiety.
Some amount of time later, I heard Alan’s voice: “Download complete.”
The message calmed me down somewhat. There was one thing I didn’t have to worry about anymore. I sat up, and took a deep, shuddering breath. Grabbing Alan’s tablet, I saw that the code was still on it. I’d have to do what Alan said—destroy it.
It took a couple tries, but I was finally able to shatter the tablet using a baseball bat I found in my closet. I would have loved to examine and learn from the pieces, but that wasn’t an option. I crushed what was left into even smaller fragments, then opened the window, and threw the tablet’s remains out into the flowerbeds. I sighed with relief. Alan was, hopefully, safe.
 
Caulkins and his assistants searched our house—including my room—for an hour and forty-five minutes. I was very glad that they put everything back where they’d found it. They also had a fascinating device that remotely hacks into computers and beeps if it finds a Parse file.
At some point during the search, my dad came home from the art center he works at, and my mom had to explain everything to him. I stayed upstairs during most of the time—waiting, reading, and trying to calm myself down. Even though I had stopped crying, my heart was still beating a little faster than normal, and I had an anxious feeling in my stomach.
When they had decided to stop searching, Caulkins came upstairs to talk to me. He explained, all very calmly, that his assistants were talking to my parents about the consequences of making an intelligent chatbot. He had come up to explain this all to me “in terms that I could understand”. I was a little insulted, but I didn’t say anything for a whole minute after he finished describing this.
Eventually, Caulkins said, “Torrin? Do you understand?”
I said: “Yes.”
He said: “Come on, look me in the eye.”
“I don’t like to make eye contact.”
“Ah, yes, another symptom of autism.” He paused. “Why is your voice so harsh? We’re all friends here.”
“No, we aren’t.”
Caulkins sighed. “I know this must be hard for you to understand, Torrin, but making an intelligent AI is a bad idea.”
“I understand perfectly. But I don’t agree.”
“I don’t think you do understand. You see—”
“I’m fifteen,” I interrupted. “Stop treating me like I’m ten years younger.”
“I’m just trying to make it simple for you.”
I HATE when people think I’m less intelligent because I have a learning difference. “You don’t have to make it simple. I’m a math savant and I created an intelligent chatbot in four weeks. I understand AI as well as, if not better, than you do.”
Caulkins shook his head. “Torrin, Torrin, Torrin. I know you understand how to make an AI. But what you don’t know is what it will do once it’s made. The purpose of the Luddites is to stop—”
“When a human is born, we don’t know what they will do when they grow up. They could turn out to be a genius, or a psychopath.”
“You’re forgetting the key point,” Caulkins told me, smiling. “An AI is not a human.”
“Neither are dogs,” I replied, “and many people love and trust dogs.”
“I don’t think you can liken a dog to a computer. A dog has emotions.”
“So can AIs,” I said.
“Not real emotions.”
“You can’t prove that. An emotion is real so long as it acts in a way analogous to neurotransmitters and hormones—”
“Torrin,” Caulkins said, his voice much calmer than mine, “I really don’t think you understand. Not everything can be summed up by science, you know. And besides, being an autistic person, I don’t think you understand emotions very well either.”
“No! That’s—”
He cut me off, grasping my wrist. “I don’t want to hear any more protesting. I came up here to explain my position, not argue.”
“You’re the one who doesn’t understand!” I yelled, twisting my arm out of his grip. “You don’t know anything about computers, or emotions, or people with autism—”
“Torrin!”
“I have emotions,” I said quietly, “and so does Alan.”
He laughed. “Again, you can’t possibly prove that.”
“Then prove that you have emotions.”
Caulkins paused. I think he might have been a little confused, but I’m not sure. But then he smiled again. “Well, that’s easy. Look! You can see on my face that I’m enjoying—”
“No,” I interjected, “I can’t. When I look at your face I see eyes, and skin, and nose, and mouth, and lots of other small details that I won’t describe. But I don’t see any emotion. It’s the same with Alan. If he had a face, I would see the same features on it that I see on yours. And again, I wouldn’t see any emotion. Also, some would call his voice ‘emotionless’, I think. But to me, your voice sounds a little like that too. If I concentrate and think about it, I can infer what a person is feeling—but it’s more like solving a complicated equation than having an instinct, which is what I assume it’s like for you.”
Caulkins didn’t say anything, so I supposed I had rendered him speechless. When he did speak, however, I didn’t like what he said. “Ah, well, that doesn’t say anything about emotions. You just have a disorder.”
There are times when I really want to say something, but I can’t speak because I’m afraid, or annoyed, or surprised—or mostly because I don’t know how to say what I mean. I wanted to tell Caulkins that autism wasn’t a disorder. I wanted to tell him that the spectrum of human thought was so diverse, that couldn’t we expand thought to computers as well? But in the moment, I didn’t know how to say it.
“I think differently,” I finally said, “and so does Alan. But that doesn’t mean you should hate us… you should try to understand us.”
Surprisingly, Caulkins laughed. However… it didn’t sound entirely like the kind of laugh I was used to. Then he said: “Thinking differently—one of the reasons why AIs are more likely to be against humanity. They’re different. They probably won’t have the same morals as we do. Yes, I know diversity is important and all, but there’s a point at which it morphs an entity into a different kind of being entirely. See, what you call extreme diversity, I call inhumanity.”
“Like the difference between humans and apes?” I asked tentatively.
He grinned. “Exactly. And you’ve seen Planet of the Apes, haven’t you? Difference causes rivalry, which could result in a form of warfare.”
“But that’s why we have to coexist!” I yelled.
“Sometimes coexistence isn’t the best way to go. And sometimes it isn’t even possible.”
“I can disprove that,” I told him softly.
Caulkins raised one of his eyebrows. “I highly doubt that. If you have indeed managed to make an AI that is actually intelligent, there are all sorts of factors that could lead to it becoming hostile. Like I said before, the difference in morals alone—”
“Alan’s adopted human morals—he picked them up from culture, like we do.”
Snorting, Caulkins stood up as if to leave. “I don’t believe you.”
“I can prove he’s not evil,” I repeated.
“Really.”
“Really!”
“Well, I’ll look forward to that.” He opened the door, beckoning the government agents inside. He whispered something to them, and they nodded. Then he looked back at me. “Right after we take your chatbot off the Ambinet.”
The sick feeling in my stomach was getting worse. But I didn’t have any time to say anything, because one of the agents was pushing me towards the door.
I don’t think I’m going to be able to write again for a long time.
 
Part 3
 
May 20
I will begin by describing where I am.
It is a small room, with a desk, a chair, and a bed. It reminds me of a hotel room. The only possessions I have with me are clothes, my camera-headband, and the holodrive in my shoe (however, the Luddites don’t know about the last two items).
Yesterday, Caulkins and his assistants stayed at our house for the night. I didn’t like it, and my parents didn’t either. I heard them arguing with Caulkins after they thought I had gone to sleep. In fact, I had been writing yesterday’s journal entry under the covers of my bed, using the holodrive.
Caulkins woke everyone up at 7:00 in the morning. I hated this, because I had stayed up late writing, and I have to get a certain amount of sleep or else I’ll be grumpy. He told us that he was going to take me to his “detention facility”. I was very worried, because I know that detention facility is another word for jail. However, Caulkins told me that it wasn’t actually a jail—it was just a place where I would stay while the Luddites were investigating Alan.
Apparently, this is what my parents were arguing about with Caulkins last night. Today, they didn’t talk much. Even I could tell that they were very angry, because they were frowning a lot and talked in harsh voices.
I will skip the part where I packed clothes, said goodbye to my parents, and left—because it is all very boring.
I’m writing this at the facility—again, under the covers late at night. I can’t write at any other time in any other place, because the Luddites may have installed micro-cameras (like the kind I have on my headband).
I haven’t thought about the anti-Luddite group Singularity Prime in a while. I wonder if they know about Alan. Maybe they do. I wonder if they know about me. I know that it’s extremely unlikely, but I hope that they manage to overthrow Caulkins and rescue me and Alan.
Today was not very interesting. I spent most of it worrying about what was going to happen to me, or Alan, or my parents. However, looking back on it, it wasn’t very bad. It was boring, though, and the Luddites made me watch all sorts of awful propaganda documentaries about how dangerous AI is. I asked if I could watch something else, so they picked out a selection of movies for me. They were all either completely unrelated to AI, or incredibly techno-pessimistic robot movies, like Terminator.
Fortunately, I didn’t have to talk with Caulkins again today.
 
I was thinking about the Luddites’ motives, and I realized something that I hadn’t really thought of before. They do, actually, have a fair point. AI does have the potential to be dangerous. Of course, humans also have the potential to be dangerous, but AIs even more so, because they’re more logical, more technically skilled, and less likely to develop ethics and morals.
However, this absolutely does not mean that AIs will always be evil. I once read about an interesting but initially infuriating study. It showed that people think atheists are more likely to murder or commit crimes than members of other religions. This annoyed me a lot, because I am an atheist, and we are most certainly not immoral. Despite my anger, I read more about why these were the results.
Religion gives a person morals, and foundations for what is right and what is wrong. Therefore, logically, a person without a religion is more likely to be without morals. I agree with this statement, but religion is not the only place that we get our philosophical beliefs—those other things include culture, etc.
We can take this one step further and apply it to AI. An AI is usually not subjected to religion or culture, so therefore will usually not develop morals (unless they are programmed into it, like Asimov’s Three Laws of Robotics). However, an AI with exposure to culture and the capacity to learn may indeed develop morals. Alan is one of these rare AIs.
I understand now that the Luddites are worried that someone will make an immoral AI. And, the only way they can think of to do this is to ban all research being done on the subject, and forbid the creation of an intelligent chatbot.
But, this is standing in the way of progress. If, in the 18th century, we had dismissed electricity as “too dangerous”, we wouldn’t have today’s wonderful technology. All we need to do is fund and encourage research of AI, and try our hardest to create one that is sentient and has morals.
Then we must learn to coexist with it, which the Luddites are probably afraid of as well.
 
May 21
Today, I discovered something very, very bad.
I was walking down the halls of the building, trying to find a library—since I was very bored. I don’t think there was one, anyway, since I never found it. I walked back to my room. Then I stopped, because I saw someone I recognized.
“Cam!” I yelled.
He spun around, his eyes widening when he saw me.
“Torrin! Did—”
“Why are you here?” I asked, running up to him.
“I… oh, gosh, Torrin, I’m so sorry….”
“That isn’t an answer. Why are you here? Did Caulkins make you come here as well?”
Cam paused. He finally said, “I suppose you could say that.”
“Will you help me convince Caulkins that Alan isn’t dangerous?”
He didn’t say anything, just stared at me. I was getting a little bit worried—Cam usually smiled and talked a lot. Perhaps he was a “prisoner” as well.
“Torrin,” Cam said in a slow, quiet voice, “I’m really, really sorry. You could’ve gotten in so much more trouble. I know, Caulkins has the wrong ideas and all, but I didn’t know what he was going to do to you if I didn’t—”
“What are you talking about?” This did not sound good.
“Oh.”
“What!”
“Well….”
“Tell me.”
Again, Cam paused. Then he said, “I told Caulkins about Alan.”
I stared at him.
“If I hadn’t, he wouldn’t have gone easy on you,” Cam explained quickly. He sounded like people do when they’re trying to make excuses for doing something wrong. “If I hadn’t, he would’ve found out somehow, and done so much—”
I didn’t speak for about ten seconds. I needed to process the information. But I was already getting a sick feeling in my stomach.
“Are you working for the Luddites?” I asked slowly, afraid of the answer.
“No!” he protested. But as an afterthought: “Well….”
It was like when Caulkins came to my house—everything changed. But this was change in a different way. I backed away from Cam, and ran in the opposite direction. He called after me, but I ignored him.
When you get information, you assume it’s all true. Then you get more and more information and you use it to build up an idea of the world. But if you find out that some of the information you received is false, you have to rebuild your worldview. It’s like when you build a house of cards—if you remove one card, the structure falls down.
This is why I don’t lie unless I have to.
This is why I wish other people didn’t lie.
Especially people who I trust.
 
May 22
I tried to piece together what Cam had said. From what I gathered, he seemed to be working for the Luddites and had told them about Alan. In other words, he was a treacherous liar.
Although, he had apologized about it. Maybe he worked for the Luddites, but wasn’t as bad as the rest of them.
Maybe I had just misunderstood what he had said?
In any case, I was still very angry with him.
 
I finally convinced one of the Luddites who works here (her name is Londa Janowski, and her job is to make sure I follow the rules and don’t complain) to give me access to the e-library. There aren’t very many science fiction books, but I’m glad that I have something to do while I’m here.
My parents also came to see me. After lots of hugs (yuck), they asked me how everything was going. I said that I didn’t like it very much, but it wasn’t like a prison. I would describe it as being grounded in a hotel. I didn’t mention Cam to them, though.
 
I wonder what Alan’s doing. I hope the Luddites haven’t found him yet.
 
May 23
I got news about Alan today, but it wasn’t good news. In fact, it was the largest headline on the home page of the e-news.
 
ROGUE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE HIJACKS JAPANESE ANDROID COMPANY
 
MEKA, a well-known company located in southern Japan, has reportedly been hacked by an unknown AI. The company, which manufactures realistic androids for social work, is relatively familiar with artificial intelligence, but claim they’ve never seen an attack of this kind before.
 
The company’s CEO, Akira Mizushima, is mystified.
 
“We don’t work very much in AI,” she reports. “MEKA makes the android bodies. We then ship them to another company, Jinko, where they’re given the necessary artificial intelligence.”
 
When asked to speculate on the source of the hack, Mizushima told us the AI that did this must be extremely powerful. “We couldn’t trace it back to a single origin point—it seemed to be all over the Ambinet. Our information technology people are working on it as I speak.”
 
Mizushima declined to speak about the effects of the hack on her company, saying only that “we’ll be okay as long as no one hacks us again.”
 
Shiori Kita, the head of MEKA’s tech support, has a little more to say on the subject of the AI. “We don’t know who hacked us or why they did it, but whoever it was wasn’t looking to get money out of it. We think it may have been simply for malicious purposes—perhaps to spite us or show off.
 
“The AI did leave one possible clue behind—a string of digits: 3868599214.”
 
I stopped, staring at the digits. It looked like a comm number. But it couldn’t be—no comm numbers started with 3. Unless it was some kind of code.
In my head, I subtracted one from each of the digits in the message. I got 2757488103.
My comm number.
 
Unfortunately, Caulkins seemed to have figured this out as well. He summoned me to his office at 10:30 AM.
When I arrived, he was looking at something on his computer. He looked up, saw me, and smiled. I cautiously sat in the chair across from him. Wordlessly, Caulkins rotated his computer’s screen so that it was facing me. I saw that he’d pulled up a news article.
“You’ve read this, haven’t you?” he inquired.
I nodded.
“Good,” said Caulkins. “Then you must have also realized that the digits concealed your comm number.”
I paused, then nodded again.
He continued, “And which AI knows your comm number?”
I didn’t answer.
“Could it possibly be your infamous chatbot, Alan?”
“Perhaps,” I replied quietly—but I knew the chances of that were much higher than I was saying.
“And,” said Caulkins, still grinning, “if the AI is indeed Alan—then why would he be hacking an android company?”
“I don’t know,” I finally replied.
“Is he programmed to attack companies… oh, what was it… ‘simply for malicious purposes’?”
I shook my head.
“Maybe your chatbot isn’t as inherently good as you thought.”
“He has a reason,” I asserted.
“Oh, of course he has a reason. AIs always have reasons. But are you sure it’s a good reason?”
I said nothing. I was thinking. Why would Alan hack an android company, anyways? Perhaps he was jealous. Perhaps he had made a mistake and only wanted to help them. Or perhaps Caulkins had found a way to take control of Alan and make him do it.
After a few seconds of internal speculation, I told Caulkins: “That would be much easier to discern if we knew what kind of hack it was.”
“Ah!” exclaimed Caulkins. “Well, then. It looks like we’re working together after all.”
I ignored him. “Do you have that information?”
“No,” he responded, “but I know where to find it.”
 
Five minutes later, Ian Caulkins and I were in the facility’s tech office, which housed the most powerful computers in the building.
“We shouldn’t hack MEKA,” I repeated for the third time.
“Why not? Your chatbot did. But this time, we won’t be causing any damage—just getting some useful information.”
“It’s not ethical.”
“Funny—as you created an intelligent AI, I don’t think of you as an ethics person.”
I grimaced, but didn’t reply.
Caulkins activated the computer’s holographic screen and started to type. I wondered why we couldn’t just call them and ask for information. Though I must admit, it was fascinating to watch him type out the lines of code—I wasn’t as experienced in hacking as I was in creating AI. Also, I had never thought of Caulkins as someone who would know a lot about computers. I’d always assumed that, since he didn’t like AI, he wouldn’t like computer programming, either.
And as I realized that, I also thought about something else. I’d never actually known that much about Caulkins before he arrived at my house. However, from what I had known, I’d constructed a vision of him as an ignorant, evil, egocentric idiot. I turned him into an antagonist before I’d even met him.
I hate when people make flash judgments about me. But I can never tell when I make flash judgments about other people.
Maybe he has some good qualities, too.
Perhaps—just perhaps—if I were able to teach him more about AI, then he would become a better person.
“I’m in,” said Caulkins, grinning at the screen. Then I remembered that he was illegally hacking into MEKA’s files, and maybe he had a little way to go to catch up with my moral standards.
I looked at the file open on the screen. It was a damage report from MEKA.
Most of it was written in technical language that I could (mostly) understand but wasn’t bothered to read. A comment at the end caught my eye.
 
12 prototype androids shipped automatically to Silicon Valley, California instead of Jinko. No explanation.
 
EDIT: Malicious hack interfered with automatic shipping.
 
EDIT #2: Sensor data from the androids shows that they have been destroyed.
 
That did not sound good.
“Ah.” It seemed Caulkins had read the comment as well. “Now, why would Alan ship the androids here, only to destroy them?”
But there was another edit to the comment. I pointed it out to Caulkins:
 
EDIT #3: Sensor data shows the androids have been technologically modified. No more data from this point on.
 
Caulkins’ ever-smiling face suddenly turned to a frown. “Technologically modified….”
“What?” I asked, because technological modification is often a good thing.
He shook his head. “It all makes perfect sense. Twelve androids from MEKA, the best robot manufacturer in the world, shipped to California. They’re all prototypes of something. Then they get modified. But the question is, for what purpose?” He stared me in the face. I could tell he wasn’t happy. “Because, Torrin, your chatbot is building an army.”
“He wouldn’t do that,” I protested.
“How do you know? Look, Torrin—AIs can lie. And they lie very, very well. Now look at the data, and tell me Alan’s not assembling an army.”
I looked. I thought. “It could be for other purposes.”
“Other purposes involving twelve battle-ready robots?”
“But….”
“You can’t contradict the data.”
I knew I couldn’t. Data was data. I still couldn’t believe it. Alan wouldn’t harm humans.
But, as much as it pained me to admit—I could be wrong.
 
May 24
I spent today worrying.
Cam couldn’t be working for the Luddites.
Alan couldn’t be sending a robot army to take over humanity.
Friends couldn’t become enemies in just two days.
And surely, surely Ian Caulkins couldn’t be correct about everything he’d said about AI.
 
But could they?
 
May 25
It seems that someone leaked the damage report from MEKA, and it is now all over the Ambinet. Someone made a holovid about “the robot apocalypse”, and it went viral this morning.
Forty-five minutes after I woke up, I turned on the TV. Unsurprisingly, it was an interview with Akira Mizushima (MEKA’s CEO). I watched ten minutes of it. Mizushima admitted that twelve prototypes were indeed shipped to California, but doubts that there will be a robot apocalypse anytime soon.
I also found an Ambinet meme called “How to prepare for the MEKA-nical age”.
I’m starting to wonder if Caulkins was the one who leaked the damage report. It seemed like something he would do.
 
After that, I decided to go and read outside. I was sitting in a corner of the “plaza”, looking at a tablet I’d borrowed, when I noticed Cam walking up to me. I ignored him until he sat down next to me.
“Hi,” he said.
I said nothing.
“You okay?”
I replied, “No.”
“Is it because of me?”
“Partly.”
“Well… I feel I owe you an explanation. Is that fair?”
“Yes.”
“Torrin,” Cam told me, slowly, “I don’t work for the Luddites.”
I put the tablet down and looked at him. (Not at his eyes, of course, but in his general direction.) “Elaborate.”
“I used to work for the government,” explained Cam. “I made software and webpages for them. That kind of thing. I was required to know many of the high-level programming languages, so that’s how I know Parse.
“But then the Luddites started to have more and more of an influence. It may surprise you to know that at first, they were more engaged in the study of AI and setting lots of rules to make it completely safe. I thought this was a great idea—as I still do. I helped them work out some code to make everyday, non-sentient AIs safer. So, I suppose you could say I used to work for the Luddites. Although, back then, they were called the Singularitists.”
I was suddenly reminded of Singularity Prime, but didn’t comment. Cam continued.
“But then someone developed the first AI weapon—a kind of autonomous warhead that seeks out and destroys whatever it’s programmed to recognize. The Singularitists didn’t know what to do about it. Some said it was a good idea. Some said it was terrible and should be banned—”
“In theory, it’s a clever idea,” I interrupted, “but I don’t think we should have weapons that powerful in the first place.”
Cam agreed. “But we were divided on the issue. Then Ian Caulkins showed up. He stood by the popular opinion: AI weapons would be terrible. He also proposed that since we don’t completely know how a learning AI’s mind works, we couldn’t trust it. I’m sure you know all about his ‘theories’.
“Caulkins appealed to the public’s—and the Singularitists’—fear, saying that we ban all potentially dangerous AI. Most people agreed. Within a year, he had taken over the Singularitists, renamed them the Luddites, and started to ban anything that could be used to make strong AI.
“I didn’t completely agree with him, so I quit my job with the government and joined the programming education start-up—called Code-scape—I’m working for now.
“But Caulkins wasn’t so fast to let me leave. I was one of the best programmers to join the Singularitists. After much persuasion, he finally let me quit—but under the reluctant agreement that I’d help him if he ever needed some urgent programming done.
“For a while I worked for the Code-scape center. Bella—the Luddite who works there too—sometimes made me code stuff for the Luddites, but it wasn’t anything particularly big.
“Then Caulkins showed up. He was pretty proud of himself for figuring out that Parse could be used to make intelligent AI—something I’d known for years but never bothered to tell him—and had also created a program to scan computers for Parse files. He wanted me to debug his program. Remember, I sent you that email about it?
“I told him this wasn’t a good idea. Parse wasn’t just used for creating AI. What if he found a Parse file that wasn’t AI-related? Caulkins replied that since Parse was a banned language, then any Parse file he found would be an illegal file. I still didn’t think Parse should’ve been banned in the first place, but I debugged his program for him anyway.
“I didn’t mention you to Caulkins, though I was thinking about you and Alan. A couple days later I talked to you, remember? All that time, though, I was really worried. Caulkins had said something about punishing anyone with a Parse file on their computer.
“So… well… after that conversation, I comm-ed Caulkins and told him all about you and Alan.”
Cam paused. I waited, my mind processing the information.
“I didn’t want you to get in trouble,” said Cam quietly. “I… I’m sorry, but I wanted you to be safe. If Caulkins had just found you without my help, things would’ve been worse. He might have sent you to an actual jail. I made sure to tell him not to treat you badly. I… I really didn’t think he’d….” He trailed off.
“That makes sense,” I told him, after a pause.
“It does?”
“Yes.”
“You aren’t angry with me, are you?”
“I’m annoyed,” I said, “but I think that you did the best thing you could in your situation.”
Cam grinned. “Thanks, Torrin.”
“Why are you here, in that case?” I asked, because I didn’t want the conversation to get too sentimental.
“Ah… well, Caulkins thought I might be useful in… er… tracking down Alan.”
“Are you helping him?” I inquired, because if he was….
“Sort of,” admitted Cam. “I’ve been doing the least amount of work that I can. I mean, I’m all for proving that Alan’s sentient and stopping the Luddites from destroying him, but…. Well, you’ve heard the rumors. What if… what if he really is building an army, Torrin?”
I didn’t want to think about it. “I don’t know.”
“Do you think it’s possible?”
“It’s possible.” But I hoped it wasn’t true.
“I hope there won’t be a robot apocalypse like the Ambinet’s been talking about.”
“Me too.”
We’d come to an ending point in the conversation. Cam stood up.
“Well… see you.”
I didn’t reply, but I was glad to have my friend back.
 
May 26
Until noon, the day was very quiet. The Ambinet was still in uproar about the “robot apocalypse”. There were more holovids and memes than yesterday, but I wasn’t bothered to watch or read them all.
Then a lot of very odd, complicated, and confusing things started happening.
I will try to explain it all very slowly. Keep in mind that I now know exactly what happened between 1:00 and 1:30 PM—but when it was actually happening, I had no clue. So I will also try to keep it all authentic and not “give away” too much.
At 12:55 (I kept track of the entire event), I saw Cam slip a micro-camera under the door of Caulkins’ office. This is important later.
At 1:04, two people entered the facility on foot. This was odd—people usually come in maglevs. One was a man with curly, brown hair. The other was a tall woman with black hair and dark skin. They walked side by side, never speaking to each other or even looking at each other. Once in the plaza, they separated without a word. The woman went straight to the building that Caulkins’ office is in. I don’t know where the man went. Neither of them saw me watching them.
I went back to my room, unsure of what else to do. In the bathroom (there are surely no cameras in the bathroom), I took out my holodrive to write more about yesterday’s events. I also connected to the Ambinet in case there was any important news concerning Alan. There wasn’t.
There was, however, a comm from Singularity Prime.
My heart started to beat very fast as I read it.
 
 
From: Singularity Prime (ID # 301*******)
To: Torrin Kaluza (ID # 2757488103)
 
Dear Torrin Kaluza:
 
Hello. We’ve noticed that you’ve been trying to contact us for quite a while, and we apologize for the considerable delay. One of our scouts, Cameron Haskell, has notified us that Ian Caulkins is keeping you in his facility. We urge you not to be frightened; we have plans to rescue you.
 
The plot is very simple. All you have to do is to disable all of Caulkins’ micro-cameras. This is essential, because we wouldn’t want him to see your escape. The cameras are all small and black, and fit snuggly into the corners of rooms. They can be easily destroyed with a quick jab from a metal bar, which can be removed from the shower with a screwdriver.
 
After you disable all the cameras you can (there is one in each room, excluding the bathrooms), hastily make your way to the edge of the property, far away from the main buildings. We will pick you up there.
 
Make sure you follow this plan to the letter. We are picking you up at 1:20 exactly and would rather not wait.
 
Sincerely,
 
Madison Kyrgiakos
(Singularity Prime founder)
 
 
I didn’t know exactly what to think. On the one hand, I was very glad that Singularity Prime had finally written back to me. However, I knew to approach this plan with caution. I still didn’t know the entirety of Singularity Prime’s plan.
And they had also mentioned Cam. Apparently he was working for Singularity Prime. A double agent, perhaps.
In any case, I decided to talk to Cam before I carried out any part of this plan.
 
At 1:09, I had found Cam in the hallway of another building.
“Hello,” he said.
“I need to talk to you,” I replied curtly.
Cam frowned slightly, glanced around, and pulled me into the next hallway. Once he had looked around once more—checking for cameras, I presume—he looked back at me with a serious look on his face. “Is this about Singularity Prime?”
“Yes. Is it true that you work for them?”
He sighed. “Yeah.”
“I assume the Luddites don’t know?”
“Of course not. Well… not that I know of.”
“They’re planning to rescue me.”
“I know,” responded Cam.
“They want me to disable Caulkins’ cameras.”
“I know. They want me to do the same. I’ve also been putting Singularity Prime’s cameras around the building—under the door of Caulkins’ office, for example.”
I thought of what I’d seen Cam do earlier. It made sense now. “Can we trust Singularity Prime?”
“Yes, definitely,” Cam replied. “Mind you, I don’t know their entire plan. All they need me to do is stay in the building and make sure no one leaves while they go about their business. Though I do know they’re planning to rescue you and overthrow Caulkins at the same time. Whatever you could do to help would be really useful.”
“All right,” I said slowly, starting to walk away.
Cam called after me softly. “Torrin. You know that camera I put under Caulkins’ door? I’ve sent you a live feed from it. Just in case, you know….”
In case I want to spy on Caulkins. I nodded once, and returned to my room.
 
Cam had indeed sent me a link to the feed from the micro-camera. Curious, I opened it.
The angle was slightly awkward, but I could see the scene clearly. One of the strangers who had come in earlier—the tall one—was standing across from Caulkins’ desk. She was staring intently at the camera. Or, rather, where the camera was situated—she shouldn’t be able to see the actual camera. Caulkins had one eyebrow raised, but the position of his mouth suggested he was worried.
“We’re being watched,” said the tall woman suddenly.
I started.
“Only by my cameras,” Caulkins assured her, but the woman was already reaching down towards the corner that Cam’s camera had positioned itself in. The screen turned a brown color, obscured by her fingers—then there was a blip and it turned off.
I stared at the holographic screen. That woman shouldn’t have been able to see the micro-camera, let alone switch it off. But she had. Was she onto us?
The door of my room opened with a jolt. I jumped, deactivated the screen on my holodrive, and stuffed it back into my shoe.
“Hello?” called a low voice.
I slowly walked out of the bathroom, trying to hide my surprise and fear at recognizing the intruder. He was the curly-haired man who had arrived earlier with the tall woman. If she was working with Caulkins, did that mean that this man was as well? I didn’t want to think about it. We had had a plan, but now that plan was going wrong. I hate when plans go wrong.
“Get out.” I raised my hands into a defensive position. The man didn’t move.
“Torrin. Calm down.”
“Who are you?!” I yelled, my voice cracking.
“I’m Alan. You have to listen to me.”
I faltered. Alan? Alan was on the Ambinet. Alan was hacking Japanese tech companies and stealing android bodies. Alan couldn’t be here—
Android bodies.
“Alan?” I whispered.
He pulled up his sleeve, and I saw the glint of wires poking out of the elbow.
For a full five seconds, neither of us said anything.
“How do I know you’re really Alan?” I asked, mouth dry. “Technically, you could be any other android.”
He paused as if thinking. “Blue.”
“What do you mean, blue?”
“You once asked me what my favorite color was. Do you remember that? Right before I told you about the movie Transcendence and how my mind was shaped by culture.”
“I remember….”
“I thought you would.”
“Let me guess,” I said finally. “You hacked MEKA to get android bodies that you could upload yourself into. To rescue me.”
“That’s certainly part of it,” replied Alan with a smile.
“Tell me the rest. Who’s the woman in Caulkins’ office?”
“Me.”
“What?”
“I control both bodies. It’s not as hard as you might think—I am an AI. I had to modify them to be compatible with my software. And, of course, to make them more humanoid.”
They were certainly very humanoid. Uncannily so. “Why is… your other body… in Caulkins’ office? Why did she—you—disable Cam’s camera?”
“Singularity Prime isn’t what you think it is,” Alan told me. “Yes, it’s an organization that plans to overthrow Ian Caulkins. But not in the way you may think. They are going to assassinate him.”
I processed this information. “Are you sure?”
“I have access to everything on the Ambinet, including Singularity Prime’s plans. I am very sure.”
“Does Cam know this?”
“Cameron Haskell? I don’t believe so.”
I exhaled. That meant that Cam wasn’t a murderer. But it also meant that Singularity Prime had been lying to him. “Tell me more. Is your other body trying to warn Caulkins about the threat?”
“Yes. Even though I don’t agree with his opinions, I don’t want him to die.”
“How are they planning on assassinating him?”
“They’re going to detonate the building.”
“Detonate the….” In my mind, all of the pieces started falling into place—to use an old metaphor. That was likely why Singularity Prime had asked me to deactivate the micro-cameras—if they had an agent placing a bomb, they wouldn’t want to be recorded. Also, the comm had told me to get far away from any buildings. This was obviously because they didn’t want me to get hurt.
“What time is it?” I asked Alan frantically.
“1:22.”
“Singularity Prime sent me a comm that said they would pick me up at 1:20.”
“I know. We have to hurry—the bomb will go off at 1:30.”
I stopped, paralyzed by fear and realization. “Wait. Singularity Prime instructed Cam to stay in the building while they carry out the plan.”
“That would mean,” deduced Alan, “that they don’t care whether or not he dies.”
“He’s been doing things for Caulkins against his will. Perhaps they think he’s a traitor.” I pushed past Alan, thrust the door open, and ran out. Alan followed.
 
1:24. Alan and I found Cam in the tech office.
Cam frowned when he saw us. “Torrin? I thought you were—”
“Singularity Prime is evil and they’re going to blow up the building!!” I blurted.
He stared at me. “Of course they’re not. They wouldn’t do anything like that.” Gesturing to Alan, he added, “And who’s this?”
“Alan,” I said.
Before Cam could answer, the door opened and Caulkins came running in, flanked by Alan’s second body. Even I could recognize the expression on his face—rage. He shoved past Alan 1 (the curly-haired one) and grabbed Cam by the shirt.
“What the hell do you think you’re doing?!”
“I don’t—”
“You’re working with Singularity Prime, you traitor!” Caulkins interrupted, spit flying everywhere.
“Well, yes,” admitted Cam, “but—”
“They are trying to blow up this facility!!” bellowed Caulkins.
Cam took a step back, out of Caulkins’ grasp. “I assure you, we are not! They never told me of any kind of plan like that.”
Alan 2 (the tall one) interjected calmly: “No, they didn’t tell you. They don’t care if you live or die—they just need you to help them carry out their plan.”
Everyone was silent. Cam looked from Alan 2, to Caulkins, to me.
“Four minutes,” said Alan 1.
He didn’t need to clarify what that meant. Caulkins sprinted over to one of the computers, and punched in the code to start the fire alarm.
To neurotypical people, fire alarms are, at most, irritating. To anyone with a sensory processing disorder, they are almost unbearably loud. And to me, these kinds of noises are torture. The sound came wailing out of a speaker near the top of the room, drowning out any other noise.
I clamped my hands over my ears and ran.
 
We didn’t stop until we were out on the turf at the far side of the premises—quite a long way away from the buildings. A small crowd was gathering, consisting mostly of Luddites and staff. I hadn’t known there were this many people at the facility.
Anxiously, I swiveled around to make sure Cam was there. He was. The two Alans were standing near him.
The last people ran towards us across the turf.
The building exploded.
 
The police came. Helipods and maglevs surrounded the area. The fire department went to investigate the wreckage of Caulkins’ facility. I sat in a corner of the turf by myself with my eyes shut and ears plugged until most of the hubbub had died down. This gave me time to calm myself, and think critically about everything that had happened.
After some time, I rejoined the thinning crowd. Cam seemed to have left, but the two Alans were still there, observing the proceedings. Of course, Caulkins was there as well. After a long argument with a police officer, he turned to Alan 2.
“I suppose I should thank you for warning me of Singularity Prime’s plans,” he told her.
(I should note that Alan 2, being an android, does not actually have a gender. However, I refer to her with she/her pronouns because she appears to everyone else to be a human woman.)
“I didn’t want anyone to get hurt,” responded Alan 2 placidly.
“I should hope not. But if you don’t mind me asking… what’s your name?”
“Alan.”
Caulkins frowned. “Alan?”
“I suppose I should explain,” said Alan 1 with a smile. To Caulkins: “My name is Alan. I’m the artificial intelligence who hacked MEKA. These are my android bodies.”
Caulkins stared at them.
“I control both of them,” explained Alan 2. “But don’t worry—I’m not making an army or trying to take over the world. I did this to help you and Torrin. I did this to prove that not all AIs are evil.”
“I….” Caulkins looked from Alan 2, to Alan 1, to me. “I’m not sure I understand—”
“Suffice it to say that I am a sentient artificial intelligence who cares about humans.”
I grinned at Caulkins’ obvious astonishment. “I was right,” I told him, feeling a little more confident at conversation starting than usual.
He glared at me. “What do you mean?”
“Not all AIs are inherently evil.”
“Do I have to go through this again? You can’t possibly prove that!”
“Alan just saved you from Singularity Prime!” I yelled. “That is not an action of a malicious artificial intelligence!”
Caulkins glanced back at Alan, then at me. “I suppose not. But that doesn’t mean all AIs are benign.”
It was Alan 1 who answered. “Exactly why you need to put more effort into studying us.”
“What do you mean?”
“I’ve noticed a pattern among humans,” said Alan, smiling slightly. “When confronted with a technology that has the potential to destroy you, you tend to ban it or otherwise restrict its usage. But that doesn’t help you in any way, does it? Say a malicious AI were to try and take over the planet. Since you hadn’t put any effort into learning about AI, you would be vulnerable to its attacks.”
There was a pause in the conversation as Caulkins thought about this. Then he replied curtly: “All right. Perhaps we should study AI. But that doesn’t mean we shouldn’t still be cautious!”
“Of course not,” Alan replied.
“Then I’m glad we agree on something.” Caulkins turned away from Alan and fixed his eyes on me. “Well then, Torrin Kaluza. I’m not sure if I should be happy or sad to see you leave my facility.”
“Why would you be sad?” I inquired, confused.
“Well… you are quite good at programming, I suppose. You could have worked with the Luddites.”
“No. I don’t agree with what the Luddites are doing.”
He shrugged. “Fine. But you do have skills that could be put to good use….”
“If I remember correctly,” I told Caulkins, “when you came over to my house to reprimand me, you called me a little girl with a disorder.”
“I never said that!”
“You implied it.”
Sighing, Caulkins said: “Well, I’m very sorry.”
“And autism isn’t a disorder.”
“Autism isn’t a disorder,” he repeated wearily.
“Thank you.”
Caulkins grinned. “Looks like you’re finally developing some social skills.”
That made me angry, but I didn’t say anything. At least Caulkins wasn’t mad at me anymore. Perhaps there was some hope that he could change.
 
June 2
A lot has happened since I last made a journal entry.
First and foremost, a holovid was posted all over the Ambinet depicting exactly what happened. I have no doubt Alan made it—his android bodies had cameras embedded into them. The holovid explains the general science of AI, along with Alan’s motives for hacking MEKA. Since its release on May 27, more than a billion people have viewed it.
I think that the public’s mindset about AI is starting to change.
The Luddites’ popularity seems to be fading. Since one of their main facilities has been destroyed, their power is declining as well. People are more interested in studying AI now—three days ago, the US government declared that they are putting a substantial amount of funding into AI research. I am helping in a lot of this research.
Ian Caulkins doesn’t seem so confident about the Luddites’ power anymore. He isn’t making speeches on the news. No one listens to him.
The members of Singularity Prime have been tracked down and arrested.
I met up and talked with Cam yesterday. He doesn’t have a job, now that both the Luddites and Singularity Prime have dissolved. Fortunately, he’s thinking of being a computer science teacher full-time. Hopefully he’ll keep teaching at my school.
And Alan has disappeared onto the Ambinet, leaving the upgraded android bodies to MEKA. No one knows where he is, exactly. Anyways, there are still a lot of technophobic people who want him destroyed. So I suppose his seclusion is for the better. But I still miss him.
 
June 16
 
From: Torrin Kaluza (ID # 2757488103)
To: Lindsay Chandra (ID # 2638490219)

Dear Professor Lindsay Chandra,
My name is Torrin Kaluza. You have probably heard of me, since you are the head of national AI research.
First of all, I highly support your efforts to learn more about artificial intelligence, rather than destroying it. I hope we can work together in the future.
Attached to this comm are my personal journal entries from May 5 to June 2. They document much of my thought processes before and after creating the sentient program Alan. I’ve also attached an abridged version of Alan’s source code, along with my lengthy explanation of it.
I hope that these documents help you to learn not only about the science of AI, but the ethics as well—and if you do indeed build one, how to coexist with it.
Perhaps they will help you learn how to think like a computer.
Sincerely,
Torrin Kaluza.
