ACT I.

SCENE I.

          Enter MYCETES, COSROE, MEANDER, THERIDAMAS, ORTYGIUS,
          CENEUS, MENAPHON, with others.

     MYCETES. Brother Cosroe, I find myself agriev'd;
     Yet insufficient to express the same,
     For it requires a great and thundering speech:
     Good brother, tell the cause unto my lords;
     I know you have a better wit than I.

     COSROE. Unhappy Persia,—that in former age
     Hast been the seat of mighty conquerors,
     That, in their prowess and their policies,
     Have triumph'd over Afric, 5 and the bounds
     Of Europe where the sun dares scarce appear
     For freezing meteors and congealed cold,—
     Now to be rul'd and govern'd by a man
     At whose birth-day Cynthia with Saturn join'd,
     And Jove, the Sun, and Mercury denied
     To shed their 6 influence in his fickle brain!
     Now Turks and Tartars shake their swords at thee,
     Meaning to mangle all thy provinces.

     MYCETES. Brother, I see your meaning well enough,
     And through 7 your planets I perceive you think
     I am not wise enough to be a king:
     But I refer me to my noblemen,
     That know my wit, and can be witnesses.
     I might command you to be slain for this,—
     Meander, might I not?

     MEANDER. Not for so small a fault, my sovereign lord.

     MYCETES. I mean it not, but yet I know I might.—
     Yet live; yea, live; Mycetes wills it so.—
     Meander, thou, my faithful counsellor,
     Declare the cause of my conceived grief,
     Which is, God knows, about that Tamburlaine,
     That, like a fox in midst of harvest-time,
     Doth prey upon my flocks of passengers;
     And, as I hear, doth mean to pull my plumes:
     Therefore 'tis good and meet for to be wise.

     MEANDER. Oft have I heard your majesty complain
     Of Tamburlaine, that sturdy Scythian thief,
     That robs your merchants of Persepolis
     Trading by land unto the Western Isles,
     And in your confines with his lawless train
     Daily commits incivil 8 outrages,
     Hoping (misled by dreaming prophecies)
     To reign in Asia, and with barbarous arms
     To make himself the monarch of the East:
     But, ere he march in Asia, or display
     His vagrant ensign in the Persian fields,
     Your grace hath taken order by Theridamas,
     Charg'd with a thousand horse, to apprehend
     And bring him captive to your highness' throne.

     MYCETES. Full true thou speak'st, and like thyself, my lord,
     Whom I may term a Damon for thy love:
     Therefore 'tis best, if so it like you all,
     To send my thousand horse incontinent 9
     To apprehend that paltry Scythian.
     How like you this, my honourable lords?
     Is it not a kingly resolution?

     COSROE. It cannot choose, because it comes from you.

     MYCETES. Then hear thy charge, valiant Theridamas,
     The chiefest 10 captain of Mycetes' host,
     The hope of Persia, and the very legs
     Whereon our state doth lean as on a staff,
     That holds us up and foils our neighbour foes:
     Thou shalt be leader of this thousand horse,
     Whose foaming gall with rage and high disdain
     Have sworn the death of wicked Tamburlaine.
     Go frowning forth; but come thou smiling home,
     As did Sir Paris with the Grecian dame:
     Return with speed; time passeth swift away;
     Our life is frail, and we may die to-day.

     THERIDAMAS. Before the moon renew her borrow'd light,
     Doubt not, my lord and gracious sovereign,
     But Tamburlaine and that Tartarian rout 11
     Shall either perish by our warlike hands,
     Or plead for mercy at your highness' feet.

     MYCETES. Go, stout Theridamas; thy words are swords,
     And with thy looks thou conquerest all thy foes.
     I long to see thee back return from thence,
     That I may view these milk-white steeds of mine
     All loaden with the heads of killed men,
     And, from their knees even to their hoofs below,
     Besmear'd with blood that makes a dainty show.

     THERIDAMAS. Then now, my lord, I humbly take my leave.

     MYCETES. Theridamas, farewell ten thousand times.

          [Exit THERIDAMAS.]

     Ah, Menaphon, why stay'st thou thus behind,
     When other men press 12 forward for renown?
     Go, Menaphon, go into Scythia,
     And foot by foot follow Theridamas.

     COSROE. Nay, pray you, 13 let him stay; a greater [task]
     Fits Menaphon than warring with a thief:
     Create him pro-rex of all 14 Africa,
     That he may win the Babylonians' hearts,
     Which will revolt from Persian government,
     Unless they have a wiser king than you.

     MYCETES. Unless they have a wiser king than you!
     These are his words; Meander, set them down.

     COSROE. And add this to them,—that all Asia
     Lament to see the folly of their king.

     MYCETES. Well, here I swear by this my royal seat—

     COSROE. You may do well to kiss it, then.

     MYCETES. Emboss'd with silk as best beseems my state,
     To be reveng'd for these contemptuous words!
     O, where is duty and allegiance now?
     Fled to the Caspian or the Ocean main?
     What shall I call thee? brother? no, a foe;
     Monster of nature, shame unto thy stock,
     That dar'st presume thy sovereign for to mock!—
     Meander, come:  I am abus'd, Meander.

          [Exeunt all except COSROE and MENAPHON.]

     MENAPHON. How now, my lord! what, mated 15 and amaz'd
     To hear the king thus threaten like himself!

     COSROE. Ah, Menaphon, I pass not 16 for his threats!
     The plot is laid by Persian noblemen
     And captains of the Median garrisons
     To crown me emperor of Asia:
     But this it is that doth excruciate
     The very substance of my vexed soul,
     To see our neighbours, that were wont to quake
     And tremble at the Persian monarch's name,
     Now sit and laugh our regiment 17 to scorn;
     And that which might resolve 18 me into tears,
     Men from the farthest equinoctial line
     Have swarm'd in troops into the Eastern India,
     Lading their ships 19 with gold and precious stones,
     And made their spoils from all our provinces.

     MENAPHON. This should entreat your highness to rejoice,
     Since Fortune gives you opportunity
     To gain the title of a conqueror
     By curing of this maimed empery.
     Afric and Europe bordering on your land,
     And continent to your dominions,
     How easily may you, with a mighty host,
     Pass 20 into Graecia, as did Cyrus once,
     And cause them to withdraw their forces home,
     Lest you 21 subdue the pride of Christendom!

          [Trumpet within.]

     COSROE. But, Menaphon, what means this trumpet's sound?

     MENAPHON. Behold, my lord, Ortygius and the rest
     Bringing the crown to make you emperor!

          Re-enter ORTYGIUS and CENEUS, 22 with others, bearing a
          crown.

     ORTYGIUS. Magnificent and mighty prince Cosroe,
     We, in the name of other Persian states 23
     And commons of this mighty monarchy,
     Present thee with th' imperial diadem.

     CENEUS. The warlike soldiers and the gentlemen,
     That heretofore have fill'd Persepolis
     With Afric captains taken in the field,
     Whose ransom made them march in coats of gold,
     With costly jewels hanging at their ears,
     And shining stones upon their lofty crests,
     Now living idle in the walled towns,
     Wanting both pay and martial discipline,
     Begin in troops to threaten civil war,
     And openly exclaim against their 24 king:
     Therefore, to stay all sudden mutinies,
     We will invest your highness emperor;
     Whereat the soldiers will conceive more joy
     Than did the Macedonians at the spoil
     Of great Darius and his wealthy host.

     COSROE. Well, since I see the state of Persia droop
     And languish in my brother's government,
     I willingly receive th' imperial crown,
     And vow to wear it for my country's good,
     In spite of them shall malice my estate.

     ORTYGIUS. And, in assurance of desir'd success,
     We here do crown thee monarch of the East [;]
     Emperor of Asia and Persia; 25
     Great lord of Media and Armenia;
     Duke of Africa and Albania,
     Mesopotamia and of Parthia,
     East India and the late-discover'd isles;
     Chief lord of all the wide vast Euxine Sea,
     And of the ever-raging 26 Caspian Lake.

     ALL. 27 Long live Cosroe, mighty emperor!

     COSROE. And Jove may 28 never let me longer live
     Than I may seek to gratify your love,
     And cause the soldiers that thus honour me
     To triumph over many provinces!
     By whose desires of discipline in arms
     I doubt not shortly but to reign sole king,
     And with the army of Theridamas
     (Whither we presently will fly, my lords,)
     To rest secure against my brother's force.

     ORTYGIUS. We knew, 29 my lord, before we brought the crown,
     Intending your investion so near
     The residence of your despised brother,
     The lords 30 would not be too exasperate
     To injury 31 or suppress your worthy title;
     Or, if they would, there are in readiness
     Ten thousand horse to carry you from hence,
     In spite of all suspected enemies.

     COSROE. I know it well, my lord, and thank you all.

     ORTYGIUS. Sound up the trumpets, then.

          [Trumpets sounded.]

     ALL. 32 God save the king!

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE leading ZENOCRATE, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE,
          AGYDAS, MAGNETES, LORDS, and SOLDIERS loaden with treasure.

     TAMBURLAINE. Come, lady, let not this appal your thoughts;
     The jewels and the treasure we have ta'en
     Shall be reserv'd, and you in better state
     Than if you were arriv'd in Syria,
     Even in the circle of your father's arms,
     The mighty Soldan of Aegyptia.

     ZENOCRATE. Ah, shepherd, pity my distressed plight!
     (If, as thou seem'st, thou art so mean a man,)
     And seek not to enrich thy followers
     By lawless rapine from a silly maid,
     Who, travelling 33 with these Median lords
     To Memphis, from my uncle's country of Media,
     Where, all my youth, I have been governed,
     Have pass'd the army of the mighty Turk,
     Bearing his privy-signet and his hand
     To safe-conduct us thorough 34 Africa.

     MAGNETES. And, since we have arriv'd in Scythia,
     Besides rich presents from the puissant Cham,
     We have his highness' letters to command
     Aid and assistance, if we stand in need.

     TAMBURLAINE. But now you see these letters and commands
     Are countermanded by a greater man;
     And through my provinces you must expect
     Letters of conduct from my mightiness,
     If you intend to keep your treasure safe.
     But, since I love to live at liberty,
     As easily may you get the Soldan's crown
     As any prizes out of my precinct;
     For they are friends that help to wean my state
     Till men and kingdoms help to strengthen it,
     And must maintain my life exempt from servitude.—
     But, tell me, madam, is your grace betroth'd?

     ZENOCRATE. I am, my lord,—for so you do import.

     TAMBURLAINE. I am a lord, for so my deeds shall prove;
     And yet a shepherd by my parentage.
     But, lady, this fair face and heavenly hue
     Must grace his bed that conquers Asia,
     And means to be a terror to the world,
     Measuring the limits of his empery
     By east and west, as Phoebus doth his course.—
     Lie here, ye weeds, that I disdain to wear!
     This complete armour and this curtle-axe
     Are adjuncts more beseeming Tamburlaine.—
     And, madam, whatsoever you esteem
     Of this success, and loss unvalued, 35
     Both may invest you empress of the East;
     And these that seem but silly country swains
     May have the leading of so great an host
     As with their weight shall make the mountains quake,
     Even as when windy exhalations,
     Fighting for passage, tilt within the earth.

     TECHELLES. As princely lions, when they rouse themselves,
     Stretching their paws, and threatening herds of beasts,
     So in his armour looketh Tamburlaine.
     Methinks I see kings kneeling at his feet,
     And he with frowning brows and fiery looks
     Spurning their crowns from off their captive heads.

     USUMCASANE. And making thee and me, Techelles, kings,
     That even to death will follow Tamburlaine.

     TAMBURLAINE. Nobly resolv'd, sweet friends and followers!
     These lords perhaps do scorn our estimates,
     And think we prattle with distemper'd spirits:
     But, since they measure our deserts so mean,
     That in conceit 36 bear empires on our spears,
     Affecting thoughts coequal with the clouds,
     They shall be kept our forced followers
     Till with their eyes they view us emperors.

     ZENOCRATE. The gods, defenders of the innocent.
     Will never prosper your intended drifts,
     That thus oppress poor friendless passengers.
     Therefore at least admit us liberty,
     Even as thou hop'st to be eternized
     By living Asia's mighty emperor.

     AGYDAS. I hope our lady's treasure and our own
     May serve for ransom to our liberties:
     Return our mules and empty camels back,
     That we may travel into Syria,
     Where her betrothed lord, Alcidamus,
     Expects the arrival of her highness' person.

     MAGNETES. And wheresoever we repose ourselves,
     We will report but well of Tamburlaine.

     TAMBURLAINE. Disdains Zenocrate to live with me?
     Or you, my lords, to be my followers?
     Think you I weigh this treasure more than you?
     Not all the gold in India's wealthy arms
     Shall buy the meanest soldier in my train.
     Zenocrate, lovelier than the love of Jove,
     Brighter than is the silver Rhodope, 37
     Fairer than whitest snow on Scythian hills,
     Thy person is more worth to Tamburlaine
     Than the possession of the Persian crown,
     Which gracious stars have promis'd at my birth.
     A hundred Tartars shall attend on thee,
     Mounted on steeds swifter than Pegasus;
     Thy garments shall be made of Median silk,
     Enchas'd with precious jewels of mine own,
     More rich and valurous 38 than Zenocrate's;
     With milk-white harts upon an ivory sled
     Thou shalt be drawn amidst the frozen pools, 39
     And scale the icy mountains' lofty tops,
     Which with thy beauty will be soon resolv'd: 40
     My martial prizes, with five hundred men,
     Won on the fifty-headed Volga's waves,
     Shall we all offer 41 to Zenocrate,
     And then myself to fair Zenocrate.

     TECHELLES. What now! in love?

     TAMBURLAINE. Techelles, women must be flattered:
     But this is she with whom I am in 42 love.

          Enter a SOLDIER.

     SOLDIER. News, news!

     TAMBURLAINE. How now! what's the matter?

     SOLDIER. A thousand Persian horsemen are at hand,
     Sent from the king to overcome us all.

     TAMBURLAINE. How now, my lords of Egypt, and Zenocrate!
     Now must your jewels be restor'd again,
     And I, that triumph'd 43 so, be overcome?
     How say you, lordings? is not this your hope?

     AGYDAS. We hope yourself will willingly restore them.

     TAMBURLAINE. Such hope, such fortune, have the thousand horse.
     Soft ye, my lords, and sweet Zenocrate!
     You must be forced from me ere you go.—
     A thousand horsemen! we five hundred foot!
     An odds too great for us to stand against.
     But are they rich? and is their armour good!

     SOLDIER. Their plumed helms are wrought with beaten gold,
     Their swords enamell'd, and about their necks
     Hang massy chains of gold down to the waist;
     In every part exceeding brave 44 and rich.

     TAMBURLAINE. Then shall we fight courageously with them?
     Or look you I should play the orator?

     TECHELLES. No; cowards and faint-hearted runaways
     Look for orations when the foe is near:
     Our swords shall play the orators for us.

     USUMCASANE. Come, let us meet them at the mountain-top, 45
     And with a sudden and an hot alarum
     Drive all their horses headlong down the hill.

     TECHELLES. Come, let us march.

     TAMBURLAINE. Stay, Techelles; ask a parle first.

          The SOLDIERS enter.

     Open the mails, 46 yet guard the treasure sure:
     Lay out our golden wedges to the view,
     That their reflections may amaze the Persians;
     And look we friendly on them when they come:
     But, if they offer word or violence,
     We'll fight, five hundred men-at-arms to one,
     Before we part with our possession;
     And 'gainst the general we will lift our swords,
     And either lance 47 his greedy thirsting throat,
     Or take him prisoner, and his chain shall serve
     For manacles till he be ransom'd home.

     TECHELLES. I hear them come:  shall we encounter them?

     TAMBURLAINE. Keep all your standings, and not stir a foot:
     Myself will bide the danger of the brunt.

          Enter THERIDAMAS with others.

     THERIDAMAS. Where is this 48 Scythian Tamburlaine?

     TAMBURLAINE. Whom seek'st thou, Persian?  I am Tamburlaine.

     THERIDAMAS. Tamburlaine!
     A Scythian shepherd so embellished
     With nature's pride and richest furniture!
     His looks do menace heaven and dare the gods;
     His fiery eyes are fix'd upon the earth,
     As if he now devis'd some stratagem,
     Or meant to pierce Avernus' darksome vaults 49
     To pull the triple-headed dog from hell.

     TAMBURLAINE. Noble and mild this Persian seems to be,
     If outward habit judge the inward man.

     TECHELLES. His deep affections make him passionate.

     TAMBURLAINE. With what a majesty he rears his looks!—
     In thee, thou valiant man of Persia,
     I see the folly of thy 50 emperor.
     Art thou but captain of a thousand horse,
     That by characters graven in thy brows,
     And by thy martial face and stout aspect,
     Deserv'st to have the leading of an host?
     Forsake thy king, and do but join with me,
     And we will triumph over all the world:
     I hold the Fates bound fast in iron chains,
     And with my hand turn Fortune's wheel about;
     And sooner shall the sun fall from his sphere
     Than Tamburlaine be slain or overcome.
     Draw forth thy sword, thou mighty man-at-arms,
     Intending but to raze my charmed skin,
     And Jove himself will stretch his hand from heaven
     To ward the blow, and shield me safe from harm.
     See, how he rains down heaps of gold in showers,
     As if he meant to give my soldiers pay!
     And, as a sure and grounded argument
     That I shall be the monarch of the East,
     He sends this Soldan's daughter rich and brave, 51
     To be my queen and portly emperess.
     If thou wilt stay with me, renowmed 52 man,
     And lead thy thousand horse with my conduct,
     Besides thy share of this Egyptian prize,
     Those thousand horse shall sweat with martial spoil
     Of conquer'd kingdoms and of cities sack'd:
     Both we will walk upon the lofty cliffs; 53
     And Christian merchants, 54 that with Russian stems 55
     Plough up huge furrows in the Caspian Sea,
     Shall vail 56 to us as lords of all the lake;
     Both we will reign as consuls of the earth,
     And mighty kings shall be our senators.
     Jove sometime masked in a shepherd's weed;
     And by those steps that he hath scal'd the heavens
     May we become immortal like the gods.
     Join with me now in this my mean estate,
     (I call it mean, because, being yet obscure,
     The nations far-remov'd admire me not,)
     And when my name and honour shall be spread
     As far as Boreas claps his brazen wings,
     Or fair Bootes 57 sends his cheerful light,
     Then shalt thou be competitor 58 with me,
     And sit with Tamburlaine in all his majesty.

     THERIDAMAS. Not Hermes, prolocutor to the gods,
     Could use persuasions more pathetical.

     TAMBURLAINE. Nor are Apollo's oracles more true
     Than thou shalt find my vaunts substantial.

     TECHELLES. We are his friends; and, if the Persian king
     Should offer present dukedoms to our state,
     We think it loss to make exchange for that
     We are assur'd of by our friend's success.

     USUMCASANE. And kingdoms at the least we all expect,
     Besides the honour in assured conquests,
     Where kings shall crouch unto our conquering swords,
     And hosts of soldiers stand amaz'd at us,
     When with their fearful tongues they shall confess,
     These are the men that all the world admires.

     THERIDAMAS. What strong enchantments tice my yielding soul
     To these 59 resolved, noble Scythians!
     But shall I prove a traitor to my king?

     TAMBURLAINE. No; but the trusty friend of Tamburlaine.

     THERIDAMAS. Won with thy words, and conquer'd with thy looks,
     I yield myself, my men, and horse to thee,
     To be partaker of thy good or ill,
     As long as life maintains Theridamas.

     TAMBURLAINE. Theridamas, my friend, take here my hand,
     Which is as much as if I swore by heaven,
     And call'd the gods to witness of my vow.
     Thus shall my heart be still combin'd with thine
     Until our bodies turn to elements,
     And both our souls aspire celestial thrones.—
     Techelles and Casane, welcome him.

     TECHELLES. Welcome, renowmed 60 Persian, to us all!

     USUMCASANE. Long may Theridamas remain with us!

     TAMBURLAINE. These are my friends, in whom I more rejoice
     Than doth the king of Persia in his crown;
     And, by the love of Pylades and Orestes,
     Whose statues 61 we adore in Scythia,
     Thyself and them shall never part from me
     Before I crown you kings 62 in Asia.
     Make much of them, gentle Theridamas,
     And they will never leave thee till the death.

     THERIDAMAS. Nor thee nor them, 63 thrice-noble Tamburlaine,
     Shall want my heart to be with gladness pierc'd,
     To do you honour and security.

     TAMBURLAINE. A thousand thanks, worthy Theridamas.—
     And now, fair madam, and my noble lords,
     If you will 64 willingly remain with me,
     You shall have honours as your merits be;
     Or else you shall be forc'd with slavery.

     AGYDAS. We yield unto thee, happy Tamburlaine.

     TAMBURLAINE. For you, then, madam, I am out of doubt.

     ZENOCRATE. I must be pleas'd perforce,—wretched Zenocrate!

          [Exeunt.]




ACT II.





SCENE I.

          Enter COSROE, MENAPHON, ORTYGIUS, and CENEUS, with SOLDIERS.

     COSROE. Thus far are we towards Theridamas,
     And valiant Tamburlaine, the man of fame,
     The man that in the forehead of his fortune
     Bears figures of renown and miracle.
     But tell me, that hast seen him, Menaphon,
     What stature wields he, and what personage?

     MENAPHON. Of stature tall, and straightly fashioned,
     Like his desire, lift upwards and divine;
     So large of limbs, his joints so strongly knit,
     Such breadth of shoulders as might mainly bear
     Old Atlas' burden; 'twixt his manly pitch, 65
     A pearl more worth than all the world is plac'd,
     Wherein by curious sovereignty of art
     Are fix'd his piercing instruments of sight,
     Whose fiery circles bear encompassed
     A heaven of heavenly bodies in their spheres,
     That guides his steps and actions to the throne
     Where honour sits invested royally;
     Pale of complexion, wrought in him with passion,
     Thirsting with sovereignty and 66 love of arms;
     His lofty brows in folds do figure death,
     And in their smoothness amity and life;
     About them hangs a knot of amber hair,
     Wrapped in curls, as fierce Achilles' was,
     On which the breath of heaven delights to play,
     Making it dance with wanton majesty;
     His arms and fingers long and sinewy, 67
     Betokening valour and excess of strength;—
     In every part proportion'd like the man
     Should make the world subdu'd 68 to Tamburlaine.

     COSROE. Well hast thou pourtray'd in thy terms of life
     The face and personage of a wondrous man:
     Nature doth strive with Fortune 69 and his stars
     To make him famous in accomplish'd worth;
     And well his merits shew him to be made
     His fortune's master and the king of men,
     That could persuade, at such a sudden pinch,
     With reasons of his valour and his life,
     A thousand sworn and overmatching foes.
     Then, when our powers in points of swords are join'd,
     And clos'd in compass of the killing bullet,
     Though strait the passage and the port 70 be made
     That leads to palace of my brother's life,
     Proud is 71 his fortune if we pierce it not;
     And, when the princely Persian diadem
     Shall overweigh his weary witless head,
     And fall, like mellow'd fruit, with shakes of death,
     In fair 72 Persia noble Tamburlaine
     Shall be my regent, and remain as king.

     ORTYGIUS. In happy hour we have set the crown
     Upon your kingly head, that seeks our honour
     In joining with the man ordain'd by heaven
     To further every action to the best.

     CENEUS. He that with shepherds and a little spoil
     Durst, in disdain of wrong and tyranny,
     Defend his freedom 'gainst a monarchy,
     What will he do supported by a king,
     Leading a troop of gentlemen and lords,
     And stuff'd with treasure for his highest thoughts!

     COSROE. And such shall wait on worthy Tamburlaine.
     Our army will be forty thousand strong,
     When Tamburlaine and brave Theridamas
     Have met us by the river Araris;
     And all conjoin'd to meet the witless king,
     That now is marching near to Parthia,
     And, with unwilling soldiers faintly arm'd,
     To seek revenge on me and Tamburlaine;
     To whom, sweet Menaphon, direct me straight.

     MENAPHON. I will, my lord.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter MYCETES, MEANDER, with other LORDS; and SOLDIERS.

     MYCETES. Come, my Meander, let us to this gear.
     I tell you true, my heart is swoln with wrath
     On this same thievish villain Tamburlaine,
     And of 73 that false Cosroe, my traitorous brother.
     Would it not grieve a king to be so abus'd,
     And have a thousand horsemen ta'en away?
     And, which is worse, 74 to have his diadem
     Sought for by such scald knaves as love him not?
     I think it would:  well, then, by heavens I swear,
     Aurora shall not peep out of her doors,
     But I will have Cosroe by the head,
     And kill proud Tamburlaine with point of sword.
     Tell you the rest, Meander:  I have said.

     MEANDER. Then, having pass'd Armenian deserts now,
     And pitch'd our tents under the Georgian hills,
     Whose tops are cover'd with Tartarian thieves,
     That lie in ambush, waiting for a prey,
     What should we do but bid them battle straight,
     And rid the world of those detested troops?
     Lest, if we let them linger here a while,
     They gather strength by power of fresh supplies.
     This country swarms with vile outragious men
     That live by rapine and by lawless spoil,
     Fit soldiers for the 75 wicked Tamburlaine;
     And he that could with gifts and promises
     Inveigle him that led a thousand horse,
     And make him false his faith unto his 76 king,
     Will quickly win such as be 77 like himself.
     Therefore cheer up your minds; prepare to fight:
     He that can take or slaughter Tamburlaine,
     Shall rule the province of Albania;
     Who brings that traitor's head, Theridamas,
     Shall have a government in Media,
     Beside 78 the spoil of him and all his train:
     But, if Cosroe (as our spials say,
     And as we know) remains with Tamburlaine,
     His highness' pleasure is that he should live,
     And be reclaim'd with princely lenity.

          Enter a SPY.

     SPY. An hundred horsemen of my company,
     Scouting abroad upon these champion 79 plains,
     Have view'd the army of the Scythians;
     Which make report it far exceeds the king's.

     MEANDER. Suppose they be in number infinite,
     Yet being void of martial discipline,
     All running headlong, greedy after 80 spoils,
     And more regarding gain than victory,
     Like to the cruel brothers of the earth,
     Sprung 81 of the teeth of 82 dragons venomous,
     Their careless swords shall lance 83 their fellows' throats,
     And make us triumph in their overthrow.

     MYCETES. Was there such brethren, sweet Meander, say,
     That sprung of teeth of dragons venomous?

     MEANDER. So poets say, my lord.

     MYCETES. And 'tis a pretty toy to be a poet.
     Well, well, Meander, thou art deeply read;
     And having thee, I have a jewel sure.
     Go on, my lord, and give your charge, I say;
     Thy wit will make us conquerors to-day.

     MEANDER. Then, noble soldiers, to entrap these thieves
     That live confounded in disorder'd troops,
     If wealth or riches may prevail with them,
     We have our camels laden all with gold,
     Which you that be but common soldiers
     Shall fling in every corner of the field;
     And, while the base-born Tartars take it up,
     You, fighting more for honour than for gold,
     Shall massacre those greedy-minded slaves;
     And, when their scatter'd army is subdu'd,
     And you march on their slaughter'd carcasses,
     Share equally the gold that bought their lives,
     And live like gentlemen in Persia.
     Strike up the 84 drum, and march courageously:
     Fortune herself doth sit upon our crests.

     MYCETES. He tells you true, my masters; so he does.—
     Drums, why sound ye not when Meander speaks?

          [Exeunt, drums sounding.]




SCENE III.

          Enter COSROE, TAMBURLAINE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES,
     USUMCASANE,
          and ORTYGIUS, with others.

     COSROE. Now, worthy Tamburlaine, have I repos'd
     In thy approved fortunes all my hope.
     What think'st thou, man, shall come of our attempts?
     For, even as from assured oracle,
     I take thy doom for satisfaction.

     TAMBURLAINE. And so mistake you not a whit, my lord;
     For fates and oracles [of] heaven have sworn
     To royalize the deeds of Tamburlaine,
     And make them blest that share in his attempts:
     And doubt you not but, if you favour me,
     And let my fortunes and my valour sway
     To some 85 direction in your martial deeds,
     The world will 86 strive with hosts of men-at-arms
     To swarm unto the ensign I support.
     The host of Xerxes, which by fame is said
     To drink the mighty Parthian Araris,
     Was but a handful to that we will have:
     Our quivering lances, shaking in the air,
     And bullets, like Jove's dreadful thunderbolts,
     Enroll'd in flames and fiery smouldering mists,
     Shall threat the gods more than Cyclopian wars;
     And with our sun-bright armour, as we march,
     We'll chase the stars from heaven, and dim their eyes
     That stand and muse at our admired arms.

     THERIDAMAS. You see, my lord, what working words he hath;
     But, when you see his actions top 87 his speech,
     Your speech will stay, or so extol his worth
     As I shall be commended and excus'd
     For turning my poor charge to his direction:
     And these his two renowmed 88 friends, my lord,
     Would make one thirst 89 and strive to be retain'd
     In such a great degree of amity.

     TECHELLES. With duty and 90 with amity we yield
     Our utmost service to the fair 91 Cosroe.

     COSROE. Which I esteem as portion of my crown.
     Usumcasane and Techelles both,
     When she 92 that rules in Rhamnus' 93 golden gates,
     And makes a passage for all prosperous arms,
     Shall make me solely emperor of Asia,
     Then shall your meeds 94 and valours be advanc'd
     To rooms of honour and nobility.

     TAMBURLAINE. Then haste, Cosroe, to be king alone,
     That I with these my friends and all my men
     May triumph in our long-expected fate.
     The king, your brother, is now hard at hand:
     Meet with the fool, and rid your royal shoulders
     Of such a burden as outweighs the sands
     And all the craggy rocks of Caspia.

          Enter a MESSENGER.

     MESSENGER. My lord,
     We have discovered the enemy
     Ready to charge you with a mighty army.

     COSROE. Come, Tamburlaine; now whet thy winged sword,
     And lift thy lofty arm into 95 the clouds,
     That it may reach the king of Persia's crown,
     And set it safe on my victorious head.

     TAMBURLAINE. See where it is, the keenest curtle-axe
     That e'er made passage thorough Persian arms!
     These are the wings shall make it fly as swift
     As doth the lightning or the breath of heaven,
     And kill as sure 96 as it swiftly flies.

     COSROE. Thy words assure me of kind success:
     Go, valiant soldier, go before, and charge
     The fainting army of that foolish king.

     TAMBURLAINE. Usumcasane and Techelles, come:
     We are enow to scare the enemy,
     And more than needs to make an emperor.

          [Exeunt to the battle.]




SCENE IV.

          Enter MYCETES with his crown in his hand. 97

     MYCETES. Accurs'd be he that first invented war!
     They knew not, ah, they knew not, simple men,
     How those were 98 hit by pelting cannon-shot
     Stand staggering 99 like a quivering aspen-leaf
     Fearing the force of Boreas' boisterous blasts!
     In what a lamentable case were I,
     If nature had not given me wisdom's lore!
     For kings are clouts that every man shoots at,
     Our crown the pin 100 that thousands seek to cleave:
     Therefore in policy I think it good
     To hide it close; a goodly stratagem,
     And far from any man that is a fool:
     So shall not I be known; or if I be,
     They cannot take away my crown from me.
     Here will I hide it in this simple hole.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE.

     TAMBURLAINE. What, fearful coward, straggling from the camp,
     When kings themselves are present in the field?

     MYCETES. Thou liest.

     TAMBURLAINE. Base villain, darest thou give me 101 the lie?

     MYCETES. Away! I am the king; go; touch me not.
     Thou break'st the law of arms, unless thou kneel,
     And cry me "mercy, noble king!"

     TAMBURLAINE. Are you the witty king of Persia?

     MYCETES. Ay, marry, 102 am I:  have you any suit to me?

     TAMBURLAINE. I would entreat you to speak but three wise words.

     MYCETES. So I can when I see my time.

     TAMBURLAINE. Is this your crown?

     MYCETES. Ay:  didst thou ever see a fairer?

     TAMBURLAINE. You will not sell it, will you?

     MYCETES. Such another word, and I will have thee executed.  Come,
     give it me.

     TAMBURLAINE. No; I took it prisoner.

     MYCETES. You lie; I gave it you.

     TAMBURLAINE. Then 'tis mine.

     MYCETES. No; I mean I let you keep it.

     TAMBURLAINE. Well, I mean you shall have it again.
     Here, take it for a while:  I lend it thee,
     Till I may see thee hemm'd with armed men;
     Then shalt thou see me pull it from thy head:
     Thou art no match for mighty Tamburlaine.

          [Exit.]

     MYCETES. O gods, is this Tamburlaine the thief?
     I marvel much he stole it not away.

          [Trumpets within sound to the battle:  he runs out.]




SCENE V.

          Enter COSROE, TAMBURLAINE, MENAPHON, MEANDER, ORTYGIUS,
          THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE, with others.

     TAMBURLAINE. Hold thee, Cosroe; wear two imperial crowns;
     Think thee invested now as royally,
     Even by the mighty hand of Tamburlaine,
     As if as many kings as could encompass thee
     With greatest pomp had crown'd thee emperor.

     COSROE. So do I, thrice-renowmed man-at-arms; 103
     And none shall keep the crown but Tamburlaine:
     Thee do I make my regent of Persia,
     And general-lieutenant of my armies.—
     Meander, you, that were our brother's guide,
     And chiefest 104 counsellor in all his acts,
     Since he is yielded to the stroke of war,
     On your submission we with thanks excuse,
     And give you equal place in our affairs.

     MEANDER. Most happy 105 emperor, in humblest terms
     I vow my service to your majesty,
     With utmost virtue of my faith and duty.

     COSROE. Thanks, good Meander.—Then, Cosroe, reign,
     And govern Persia in her former pomp.
     Now send embassage to thy neighbour kings,
     And let them know the Persian king is chang'd,
     From one that knew not what a king should do,
     To one that can command what 'longs thereto.
     And now we will to fair Persepolis
     With twenty thousand expert soldiers.
     The lords and captains of my brother's camp
     With little slaughter take Meander's course,
     And gladly yield them to my gracious rule.—
     Ortygius and Menaphon, my trusty friends,
     Now will I gratify your former good,
     And grace your calling with a greater sway.

     ORTYGIUS. And as we ever aim'd 106 at your behoof,
     And sought your state all honour it 107 deserv'd,
     So will we with our powers and our 108 lives
     Endeavour to preserve and prosper it.

     COSROE. I will not thank thee, sweet Ortygius;
     Better replies shall prove my purposes.—
     And now, Lord Tamburlaine, my brother's camp
     I leave to thee and to Theridamas,
     To follow me to fair Persepolis;
     Then will we 109 march to all those Indian mines
     My witless brother to the Christians lost,
     And ransom them with fame and usury:
     And, till thou overtake me, Tamburlaine,
     (Staying to order all the scatter'd troops,)
     Farewell, lord regent and his happy friends.
     I long to sit upon my brother's throne.

     MEANDER. Your majesty shall shortly have your wish,
     And ride in triumph through Persepolis.

          [Exeunt all except TAMBURLAINE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and
          USUMCASANE.]

     TAMBURLAINE. And ride in triumph through Persepolis!—
     Is it not brave to be a king, Techelles?—
     Usumcasane and Theridamas,
     Is it not passing brave to be a king,
     And ride in triumph through Persepolis?

     TECHELLES. O, my lord, it is sweet and full of pomp!

     USUMCASANE. To be a king is half to be a god.

     THERIDAMAS. A god is not so glorious as a king:
     I think the pleasure they enjoy in heaven,
     Cannot compare with kingly joys in 110 earth;—
     To wear a crown enchas'd with pearl and gold,
     Whose virtues carry with it life and death;
     To ask and have, command and be obey'd;
     When looks breed love, with looks to gain the prize,—
     Such power attractive shines in princes' eyes.

     TAMBURLAINE. Why, say, Theridamas, wilt thou be a king?

     THERIDAMAS. Nay, though I praise it, I can live without it.

     TAMBURLAINE. What say my other friends? will you be kings?

     TECHELLES. I, if I could, with all my heart, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE. Why, that's well said, Techelles:  so would I;—
     And so would you, my masters, would you not?

     USUMCASANE. What, then, my lord?

     TAMBURLAINE. Why, then, Casane, 111 shall we wish for aught
     The world affords in greatest novelty,
     And rest attemptless, faint, and destitute?
     Methinks we should not.  I am strongly mov'd,
     That if I should desire the Persian crown,
     I could attain it with a wondrous ease:
     And would not all our soldiers soon consent,
     If we should aim at such a dignity?

     THERIDAMAS. I know they would with our persuasions.

     TAMBURLAINE. Why, then, Theridamas, I'll first assay
     To get the Persian kingdom to myself;
     Then thou for Parthia; they for Scythia and Media;
     And, if I prosper, all shall be as sure
     As if the Turk, the Pope, Afric, and Greece,
     Came creeping to us with their crowns a-piece. 112

     TECHELLES. Then shall we send to this triumphing king,
     And bid him battle for his novel crown?

     USUMCASANE. Nay, quickly, then, before his room be hot.

     TAMBURLAINE. 'Twill prove a pretty jest, in faith, my friends.

     THERIDAMAS. A jest to charge on twenty thousand men!
     I judge the purchase 113 more important far.

     TAMBURLAINE. Judge by thyself, Theridamas, not me;
     For presently Techelles here shall haste
     To bid him battle ere he pass too far,
     And lose more labour than the gain will quite: 114
     Then shalt thou see this 115 Scythian Tamburlaine
     Make but a jest to win the Persian crown.—
     Techelles, take a thousand horse with thee,
     And bid him turn him 116 back to war with us,
     That only made him king to make us sport:
     We will not steal upon him cowardly,
     But give him warning and 117 more warriors:
     Haste thee, Techelles; we will follow thee.

          [Exit TECHELLES.]

     What saith Theridamas?

     THERIDAMAS. Go on, for me.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE VI.

          Enter COSROE, MEANDER, ORTYGIUS, and MENAPHON, with
          SOLDIERS.

     COSROE. What means this devilish shepherd, to aspire
     With such a giantly presumption,
     To cast up hills against the face of heaven,
     And dare the force of angry Jupiter?
     But, as he thrust them underneath the hills,
     And press'd out fire from their burning jaws,
     So will I send this monstrous slave to hell,
     Where flames shall ever feed upon his soul.

     MEANDER. Some powers divine, or else infernal, mix'd
     Their angry seeds at his conception;
     For he was never sprung 118 of human race,
     Since with the spirit of his fearful pride,
     He dares 119 so doubtlessly resolve of rule,
     And by profession be ambitious.

     ORTYGIUS. What god, or fiend, or spirit of the earth,
     Or monster turned to a manly shape,
     Or of what mould or mettle he be made,
     What star or fate 120 soever govern him,
     Let us put on our meet encountering minds;
     And, in detesting such a devilish thief,
     In love of honour and defence of right,
     Be arm'd against the hate of such a foe,
     Whether from earth, or hell, or heaven he grow.

     COSROE. Nobly resolv'd, my good Ortygius;
     And, since we all have suck'd one wholesome air,
     And with the same proportion of elements
     Resolve, 121 I hope we are resembled,
     Vowing our loves to equal death and life.
     Let's cheer our soldiers to encounter him,
     That grievous image of ingratitude,
     That fiery thirster after sovereignty,
     And burn him in the fury of that flame
     That none can quench but blood and empery.
     Resolve, my lords and loving soldiers, now
     To save your king and country from decay.
     Then strike up, drum; and all the stars that make
     The loathsome circle of my dated life,
     Direct my weapon to his barbarous heart,
     That thus opposeth him against the gods,
     And scorns the powers that govern Persia!

          [Exeunt, drums sounding.]




SCENE VII.

          Alarms of battle within.  Then enter COSROE wounded,
          TAMBURLAINE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE, with others.

     COSROE. Barbarous 122 and bloody Tamburlaine,
     Thus to deprive me of my crown and life!—
     Treacherous and false Theridamas,
     Even at the morning of my happy state,
     Scarce being seated in my royal throne,
     To work my downfall and untimely end!
     An uncouth pain torments my grieved soul;
     And death arrests the organ of my voice,
     Who, entering at the breach thy sword hath made,
     Sacks every vein and artier 123 of my heart.—
     Bloody and insatiate Tamburlaine!

     TAMBURLAINE. The thirst of reign and sweetness of a crown,
     That caus'd the eldest son of heavenly Ops
     To thrust his doting father from his chair,
     And place himself in the empyreal heaven,
     Mov'd me to manage arms against thy state.
     What better precedent than mighty Jove?
     Nature, that fram'd us of four elements
     Warring within our breasts for regiment, 124
     Doth teach us all to have aspiring minds:
     Our souls, whose faculties can comprehend
     The wondrous architecture of the world,
     And measure every wandering planet's course,
     Still climbing after knowledge infinite,
     And always moving as the restless spheres,
     Will us to wear ourselves, and never rest,
     Until we reach the ripest fruit 125 of all,
     That perfect bliss and sole felicity,
     The sweet fruition of an earthly crown.

     THERIDAMAS. And that made me to join with Tamburlaine;
     For he is gross and like the massy earth
     That moves not upwards, nor by princely deeds
     Doth mean to soar above the highest sort.

     TECHELLES. And that made us, the friends of Tamburlaine,
     To lift our swords against the Persian king.

     USUMCASANE. For as, when Jove did thrust old Saturn down,
     Neptune and Dis gain'd each of them a crown,
     So do we hope to reign in Asia,
     If Tamburlaine be plac'd in Persia.

     COSROE. The strangest men that ever nature made!
     I know not how to take their tyrannies.
     My bloodless body waxeth chill and cold,
     And with my blood my life slides through my wound;
     My soul begins to take her flight to hell,
     And summons all my senses to depart:
     The heat and moisture, which did feed each other,
     For want of nourishment to feed them both,
     Are 126 dry and cold; and now doth ghastly Death
     With greedy talents 127 gripe my bleeding heart,
     And like a harpy 128 tires on my life.—
     Theridamas and Tamburlaine, I die:
     And fearful vengeance light upon you both!

          [Dies.—TAMBURLAINE takes COSROE'S crown, and puts it on
          his own head.]

     TAMBURLAINE. Not all the curses which the 129 Furies breathe
     Shall make me leave so rich a prize as this.
     Theridamas, Techelles, and the rest,
     Who think you now is king of Persia?

     ALL. Tamburlaine!  Tamburlaine!

     TAMBURLAINE. Though Mars himself, the angry god of arms,
     And all the earthly potentates conspire
     To dispossess me of this diadem,
     Yet will I wear it in despite of them,
     As great commander of this eastern world,
     If you but say that Tamburlaine shall reign.

     ALL. Long live Tamburlaine, and reign in Asia!

     TAMBURLAINE. So; now it is more surer on my head
     Than if the gods had held a parliament,
     And all pronounc'd me king of Persia.

          [Exeunt.]




ACT III.





SCENE I.

          Enter BAJAZETH, the KINGS OF FEZ, MOROCCO, and ARGIER, with
          others, in great pomp.

     BAJAZETH. Great kings of Barbary, and my portly bassoes, 130
     We hear the Tartars and the eastern thieves,
     Under the conduct of one Tamburlaine,
     Presume a bickering with your emperor,
     And think to rouse us from our dreadful siege
     Of the famous Grecian Constantinople.
     You know our army is invincible;
     As many circumcised Turks we have,
     And warlike bands of Christians renied, 131
     As hath the ocean or the Terrene 132 sea
     Small drops of water when the moon begins
     To join in one her semicircled horns:
     Yet would we not be brav'd with foreign power,
     Nor raise our siege before the Grecians yield,
     Or breathless lie before the city-walls.

     KING OF FEZ. Renowmed 133 emperor and mighty general,
     What, if you sent the bassoes of your guard
     To charge him to remain in Asia,
     Or else to threaten death and deadly arms
     As from the mouth of mighty Bajazeth?

     BAJAZETH. Hie thee, my basso, 134 fast to Persia;
     Tell him thy lord, the Turkish emperor,
     Dread lord of Afric, Europe, and Asia,
     Great king and conqueror of Graecia,
     The ocean, Terrene, and the Coal-black sea,
     The high and highest monarch of the world,
     Wills and commands, (for say not I entreat,)
     Not 135 once to set his foot in 136 Africa,
     Or spread 137 his colours in Graecia,
     Lest he incur the fury of my wrath:
     Tell him I am content to take a truce,
     Because I hear he bears a valiant mind:
     But if, presuming on his silly power,
     He be so mad to manage arms with me,
     Then stay thou with him,—say, I bid thee so;
     And if, before the sun have measur'd heaven 138
     With triple circuit, thou regreet us not,
     We mean to take his morning's next arise
     For messenger he will not be reclaim'd,
     And mean to fetch thee in despite of him.

     BASSO. Most great and puissant monarch of the earth,
     Your basso will accomplish your behest,
     And shew your pleasure to the Persian,
     As fits the legate of the stately Turk.

          [Exit.]

     KING OF ARGIER. They say he is the king of Persia;
     But, if he dare attempt to stir your siege,
     'Twere requisite he should be ten times more,
     For all flesh quakes at your magnificence.

     BAJAZETH. True, Argier; and tremble[s] at my looks.

     KING OF MOROCCO. The spring is hinder'd by your smothering host;
     For neither rain can fall upon the earth,
     Nor sun reflex his virtuous beams thereon,
     The ground is mantled with such multitudes.

     BAJAZETH. All this is true as holy Mahomet;
     And all the trees are blasted with our breaths.

     KING OF FEZ. What thinks your greatness best to be achiev'd
     In pursuit of the city's overthrow?

     BAJAZETH. I will the captive pioners 139 of Argier
     Cut off the water that by leaden pipes
     Runs to the city from the mountain Carnon;
     Two thousand horse shall forage up and down,
     That no relief or succour come by land;
     And all the sea my galleys countermand:
     Then shall our footmen lie within the trench,
     And with their cannons, mouth'd like Orcus' gulf,
     Batter the walls, and we will enter in;
     And thus the Grecians shall be conquered.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter ZENOCRATE, AGYDAS, ANIPPE, with others.

     AGYDAS. Madam Zenocrate, may I presume
     To know the cause of these unquiet fits
     That work such trouble to your wonted rest?
     'Tis more than pity such a heavenly face
     Should by heart's sorrow wax so wan and pale,
     When your offensive rape by Tamburlaine
     (Which of your whole displeasures should be most)
     Hath seem'd to be digested long ago.

     ZENOCRATE. Although it be digested long ago,
     As his exceeding favours have deserv'd,
     And might content the Queen of Heaven, as well
     As it hath chang'd my first-conceiv'd disdain;
     Yet since a farther passion feeds my thoughts
     With ceaseless 140 and disconsolate conceits, 141
     Which dye my looks so lifeless as they are,
     And might, if my extremes had full events,
     Make me the ghastly counterfeit 142 of death.

     AGYDAS. Eternal heaven sooner be dissolv'd,
     And all that pierceth Phoebus' silver eye,
     Before such hap fall to Zenocrate!

     ZENOCRATE. Ah, life and soul, still hover in his 143 breast,
     And leave my body senseless as the earth,
     Or else unite you 144 to his life and soul,
     That I may live and die with Tamburlaine!

          Enter, behind, TAMBURLAINE, with TECHELLES, and others.

     AGYDAS. With Tamburlaine!  Ah, fair Zenocrate,
     Let not a man so vile and barbarous,
     That holds you from your father in despite,
     And keeps you from the honours of a queen,
     (Being suppos'd his worthless concubine,)
     Be honour'd with your love but for necessity!
     So, now the mighty Soldan hears of you,
     Your highness needs not doubt but in short time
     He will, with Tamburlaine's destruction,
     Redeem you from this deadly servitude.

     ZENOCRATE. Leave 145 to wound me with these words,
     And speak of Tamburlaine as he deserves:
     The entertainment we have had of him
     Is far from villany or servitude,
     And might in noble minds be counted princely.

     AGYDAS. How can you fancy one that looks so fierce,
     Only dispos'd to martial stratagems?
     Who, when he shall embrace you in his arms,
     Will tell how many thousand men he slew;
     And, when you look for amorous discourse,
     Will rattle forth his facts 146 of war and blood,
     Too harsh a subject for your dainty ears.

     ZENOCRATE. As looks the sun through Nilus' flowing stream,
     Or when the Morning holds him in her arms,
     So looks my lordly love, fair Tamburlaine;
     His talk much 147 sweeter than the Muses' song
     They sung for honour 'gainst Pierides, 148
     Or when Minerva did with Neptune strive:
     And higher would I rear my estimate
     Than Juno, sister to the highest god,
     If I were match'd with mighty Tamburlaine.

     AGYDAS. Yet be not so inconstant in your love,
     But let the young Arabian 149 live in hope,
     After your rescue to enjoy his choice.
     You see, though first the king of Persia,
     Being a shepherd, seem'd to love you much,
     Now, in his majesty, he leaves those looks,
     Those words of favour, and those comfortings,
     And gives no more than common courtesies.

     ZENOCRATE. Thence rise the tears that so distain my cheeks,
     Fearing his love 150 through my unworthiness.

          [TAMBURLAINE goes to her, and takes her away lovingly by
          the hand, looking wrathfully on AGYDAS, and says nothing.
          Exeunt all except AGYDAS.]

     AGYDAS. Betray'd by fortune and suspicious love,
     Threaten'd with frowning wrath and jealousy,
     Surpris'd with fear of 151 hideous revenge,
     I stand aghast; but most astonied
     To see his choler shut in secret thoughts,
     And wrapt in silence of his angry soul:
     Upon his brows was pourtray'd ugly death;
     And in his eyes the fury 152 of his heart,
     That shone 153 as comets, menacing revenge,
     And cast a pale complexion on his cheeks.
     As when the seaman sees the Hyades
     Gather an army of Cimmerian clouds,
     (Auster and Aquilon with winged steeds,
     All sweating, tilt about the watery heavens,
     With shivering spears enforcing thunder-claps,
     And from their shields strike flames of lightning,)
     All-fearful folds his sails, and sounds the main,
     Lifting his prayers to the heavens for aid
     Against the terror of the winds and waves;
     So fares Agydas for the late-felt frowns,
     That send 154 a tempest to my daunted thoughts,
     And make my soul divine her overthrow.

          Re-enter TECHELLES with a naked dagger, and USUMCASANE.

     TECHELLES. See you, Agydas, how the king salutes you!
     He bids you prophesy what it imports.

     AGYDAS. I prophesied before, and now I prove
     The killing frowns of jealousy and love.
     He needed not with words confirm my fear,
     For words are vain where working tools present
     The naked action of my threaten'd end:
     It says, Agydas, thou shalt surely die,
     And of extremities elect the least;
     More honour and less pain it may procure,
     To die by this resolved hand of thine
     Than stay the torments he and heaven have sworn.
     Then haste, Agydas, and prevent the plagues
     Which thy prolonged fates may draw on thee:
     Go wander free from fear of tyrant's rage,
     Removed from the torments and the hell
     Wherewith he may excruciate thy soul;
     And let Agydas by Agydas die,
     And with this stab slumber eternally.

          [Stabs himself.]

     TECHELLES. Usumcasane, see, how right the man
     Hath hit the meaning of my lord the king!

     USUMCASANE. Faith, and, Techelles, it was manly done;
     And, since he was so wise and honourable,
     Let us afford him now the bearing hence,
     And crave his triple-worthy burial.

     TECHELLES. Agreed, Casane; we will honour him.

          [Exeunt, bearing out the body.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE, THERIDAMAS,
          a BASSO, ZENOCRATE, ANIPPE, with others.

     TAMBURLAINE. Basso, by this thy lord and master knows
     I mean to meet him in Bithynia:
     See, how he comes! tush, Turks are full of brags,
     And menace 155 more than they can well perform.
     He meet me in the field, and fetch 156 thee hence!
     Alas, poor Turk! his fortune is too weak
     T' encounter with the strength of Tamburlaine:
     View well my camp, and speak indifferently;
     Do not my captains and my soldiers look
     As if they meant to conquer Africa?

     BASSO. Your men are valiant, but their number few,
     And cannot terrify his mighty host:
     My lord, the great commander of the world,
     Besides fifteen contributory kings,
     Hath now in arms ten thousand janizaries,
     Mounted on lusty Mauritanian steeds,
     Brought to the war by men of Tripoly;
     Two hundred thousand footmen that have serv'd
     In two set battles fought in Graecia;
     And for the expedition of this war,
     If he think good, can from his garrisons
     Withdraw as many more to follow him.

     TECHELLES. The more he brings, the greater is the spoil;
     For, when they perish by our warlike hands,
     We mean to set 157 our footmen on their steeds,
     And rifle all those stately janizars.

     TAMBURLAINE. But will those kings accompany your lord?

     BASSO. Such as his highness please; but some must stay
     To rule the provinces he late subdu'd.

     TAMBURLAINE. [To his OFFICERS]
     Then fight courageously:  their crowns are yours;
     This hand shall set them on your conquering heads,
     That made me emperor of Asia.

     USUMCASANE. Let him bring millions infinite of men,
     Unpeopling Western Africa and Greece,
     Yet we assure us of the victory.

     THERIDAMAS. Even he, that in a trice vanquish'd two kings
     More mighty than the Turkish emperor,
     Shall rouse him out of Europe, and pursue
     His scatter'd army till they yield or die.

     TAMBURLAINE. Well said, Theridamas! speak in that mood;
     For WILL and SHALL best fitteth Tamburlaine,
     Whose smiling stars give him assured hope
     Of martial triumph ere he meet his foes.
     I that am term'd the scourge and wrath of God,
     The only fear and terror of the world,
     Will first subdue the Turk, and then enlarge
     Those Christian captives which you keep as slaves,
     Burdening their bodies with your heavy chains,
     And feeding them with thin and slender fare;
     That naked row about the Terrene 158 sea,
     And, when they chance to rest or breathe 159 a space,
     Are punish'd with bastones 160 so grievously
     That they 161 lie panting on the galleys' side,
     And strive for life at every stroke they give.
     These are the cruel pirates of Argier,
     That damned train, the scum of Africa,
     Inhabited with straggling runagates,
     That make quick havoc of the Christian blood:
     But, as I live, that town shall curse the time
     That Tamburlaine set foot in Africa.

          Enter BAJAZETH, BASSOES, the KINGS OF FEZ, MOROCCO,
          and ARGIER; ZABINA and EBEA.

     BAJAZETH. Bassoes and janizaries of my guard,
     Attend upon the person of your lord,
     The greatest potentate of Africa.

     TAMBURLAINE. Techelles and the rest, prepare your swords;
     I mean t' encounter with that Bajazeth.

     BAJAZETH. Kings of Fez, Morocco, 162 and Argier,
     He calls me Bajazeth, whom you call lord!
     Note the presumption of this Scythian slave!—
     I tell thee, villain, those that lead my horse
     Have to their names titles 163 of dignity;
     And dar'st thou bluntly call me Bajazeth?

     TAMBURLAINE. And know, thou Turk, that those which lead my horse
     Shall lead thee captive thorough Africa;
     And dar'st thou bluntly call me Tamburlaine?

     BAJAZETH. By Mahomet my kinsman's sepulchre,
     And by the holy Alcoran I swear,
     He shall be made a chaste and lustless eunuch,
     And in my sarell 164 tend my concubines;
     And all his captains, that thus stoutly stand,
     Shall draw the chariot of my emperess,
     Whom I have brought to see their overthrow!

     TAMBURLAINE. By this my sword that conquer'd Persia,
     Thy fall shall make me famous through the world!
     I will not tell thee how I'll 165 handle thee,
     But every common soldier of my camp
     Shall smile to see thy miserable state.

     KING OF FEZ. What means the 166 mighty Turkish emperor,
     To talk with one so base as Tamburlaine?

     KING OF MOROCCO. Ye Moors and valiant men of Barbary.
     How can ye suffer these indignities?

     KING OF ARGIER. Leave words, and let them feel your lances'
     points,
     Which glided through the bowels of the Greeks.

     BAJAZETH. Well said, my stout contributory kings!
     Your threefold army and my hugy 167 host
     Shall swallow up these base-born Persians.

     TECHELLES. Puissant, renowm'd, 168 and mighty Tamburlaine,
     Why stay we thus prolonging of 169 their lives?

     THERIDAMAS. I long to see those crowns won by our swords,
     That we may rule 170 as kings of Africa.

     USUMCASANE. What coward would not fight for such a prize?

     TAMBURLAINE. Fight all courageously, and be you kings:
     I speak it, and my words are oracles.

     BAJAZETH. Zabina, mother of three braver 171 boys
     Than Hercules, that in his infancy
     Did pash 172 the jaws of serpents venomous;
     Whose hands are made to gripe a warlike lance,
     Their shoulders broad for complete armour fit,
     Their limbs more large and of a bigger size
     Than all the brats y-sprung 173 from Typhon's loins;
     Who, when they come unto their father's age,
     Will batter turrets with their manly fists;—
     Sit here upon this royal chair of state,
     And on thy head wear my imperial crown,
     Until I bring this sturdy Tamburlaine
     And all his captains bound in captive chains.

     ZABINA. Such good success happen to Bajazeth!

     TAMBURLAINE. Zenocrate, the loveliest maid alive,
     Fairer than rocks of pearl and precious stone,
     The only paragon of Tamburlaine;
     Whose eyes are brighter than the lamps of heaven,
     And speech more pleasant than sweet harmony;
     That with thy looks canst clear the darken'd sky,
     And calm the rage of thundering Jupiter;
     Sit down by her, adorned with my crown,
     As if thou wert the empress of the world.
     Stir not, Zenocrate, until thou see
     Me march victoriously with all my men,
     Triumphing over him and these his kings,
     Which I will bring as vassals to thy feet;
     Till then, take thou my crown, vaunt of my worth,
     And manage words with her, as we will arms.

     ZENOCRATE. And may my love, the king of Persia,
     Return with victory and free from wound!

     BAJAZETH. Now shalt thou feel the force of Turkish arms,
     Which lately made all Europe quake for fear.
     I have of Turks, Arabians, Moors, and Jews,
     Enough to cover all Bithynia:
     Let thousands die; their slaughter'd carcasses
     Shall serve for walls and bulwarks to the rest;
     And as the heads of Hydra, so my power,
     Subdu'd, shall stand as mighty as before:
     If they should yield their necks unto the sword,
     Thy soldiers' arms could not endure to strike
     So many blows as I have heads for them. 174
     Thou know'st not, foolish-hardy Tamburlaine,
     What 'tis to meet me in the open field,
     That leave no ground for thee to march upon.

     TAMBURLAINE. Our conquering swords shall marshal us the way
     We use to march upon the slaughter'd foe,
     Trampling their bowels with our horses' hoofs,
     Brave horses bred on the 175 white Tartarian hills
     My camp is like to Julius Caesar's host,
     That never fought but had the victory;
     Nor in Pharsalia was there such hot war
     As these, my followers, willingly would have.
     Legions of spirits, fleeting in the air,
     Direct our bullets and our weapons' points,
     And make your strokes to wound the senseless light; 176
     And when she sees our bloody colours spread,
     Then Victory begins to take her flight,
     Resting herself upon my milk-white tent.—
     But come, my lords, to weapons let us fall;
     The field is ours, the Turk, his wife, and all.

          [Exit with his followers.]

     BAJAZETH. Come, kings and bassoes, let us glut our swords,
     That thirst to drink the feeble Persians' blood.

          [Exit with his followers.]

     ZABINA. Base concubine, must thou be plac'd by me
     That am the empress of the mighty Turk?

     ZENOCRATE. Disdainful Turkess, and unreverend boss, 177
     Call'st thou me concubine, that am betroth'd
     Unto the great and mighty Tamburlaine?

     ZABINA. To Tamburlaine, the great Tartarian thief!

     ZENOCRATE. Thou wilt repent these lavish words of thine
     When thy great basso-master and thyself
     Must plead for mercy at his kingly feet,
     And sue to me to be your advocate. 178

     ZABINA. And sue to thee!  I tell thee, shameless girl,
     Thou shalt be laundress to my waiting-maid.—
     How lik'st thou her, Ebea? will she serve?

     EBEA. Madam, she thinks perhaps she is too fine;
     But I shall turn her into other weeds,
     And make her dainty fingers fall to work.

     ZENOCRATE. Hear'st thou, Anippe, how thy drudge doth talk?
     And how my slave, her mistress, menaceth?
     Both for their sauciness shall be employ'd
     To dress the common soldiers' meat and drink;
     For we will scorn they should come near ourselves.

     ANIPPE. Yet sometimes let your highness send for them
     To do the work my chambermaid disdains.

          [They sound to the battle within.]

     ZENOCRATE. Ye gods and powers that govern Persia,
     And made my lordly love her worthy king,
     Now strengthen him against the Turkish Bajazeth,
     And let his foes, like flocks of fearful roes
     Pursu'd by hunters, fly his angry looks,
     That I may see him issue conqueror!

     ZABINA. Now, Mahomet, solicit God himself,
     And make him rain down murdering shot from heaven,
     To dash the Scythians' brains, and strike them dead,
     That dare 179 to manage arms with him
     That offer'd jewels to thy sacred shrine
     When first he warr'd against the Christians!

          [They sound again to the battle within.]

     ZENOCRATE. By this the Turks lie weltering in their blood,
     And Tamburlaine is lord of Africa.

     ZABINA. Thou art deceiv'd.  I heard the trumpets sound
     As when my emperor overthrew the Greeks,
     And led them captive into Africa.
     Straight will I use thee as thy pride deserves;
     Prepare thyself to live and die my slave.

     ZENOCRATE. If Mahomet should come from heaven and swear
     My royal lord is slain or conquered,
     Yet should he not persuade me otherwise
     But that he lives and will be conqueror.

          Re-enter BAJAZETH, pursued by TAMBURLAINE. 180

     TAMBURLAINE. Now, king of bassoes, who is conqueror?

     BAJAZETH. Thou, by the fortune of this damned foil. 181

     TAMBURLAINE. Where are your stout contributory kings?

          Re-enter TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, and USUMCASANE.

     TECHELLES. We have their crowns; their bodies strow the field.

     TAMBURLAINE. Each man a crown! why, kingly fought, i'faith.
     Deliver them into my treasury.

     ZENOCRATE. Now let me offer to my gracious lord
     His royal crown again so highly won.

     TAMBURLAINE. Nay, take the Turkish crown from her, Zenocrate,
     And crown me emperor of Africa.

     ZABINA. No, Tamburlaine; though now thou gat 182 the best,
     Thou shalt not yet be lord of Africa.

     THERIDAMAS. Give her the crown, Turkess, you were best.

          [Takes it from her.]

     ZABINA. Injurious villains, thieves, runagates,
     How dare you thus abuse my majesty?

     THERIDAMAS. Here, madam, you are empress; she is none.

          [Gives it to ZENOCRATE.]

     TAMBURLAINE. Not now, Theridamas; her time is past:
     The pillars, that have bolster'd up those terms,
     Are faln in clusters at my conquering feet.

     ZABINA. Though he be prisoner, he may be ransom'd.

     TAMBURLAINE. Not all the world shall ransom Bajazeth.

     BAJAZETH. Ah, fair Zabina! we have lost the field;
     And never had the Turkish emperor
     So great a foil by any foreign foe.
     Now will the Christian miscreants be glad,
     Ringing with joy their superstitious bells,
     And making bonfires for my overthrow:
     But, ere I die, those foul idolaters
     Shall make me bonfires with their filthy bones;
     For, though the glory of this day be lost,
     Afric and Greece have garrisons enough
     To make me sovereign of the earth again.

     TAMBURLAINE. Those walled garrisons will I subdue,
     And write myself great lord of Africa:
     So from the East unto the furthest West
     Shall Tamburlaine extend his puissant arm.
     The galleys and those pilling 183 brigandines,
     That yearly sail to the Venetian gulf,
     And hover in the Straits for Christians' wreck,
     Shall lie at anchor in the Isle Asant,
     Until the Persian fleet and men-of-war,
     Sailing along the oriental sea,
     Have fetch'd about the Indian continent,
     Even from Persepolis to Mexico,
     And thence unto the Straits of Jubalter;
     Where they shall meet and join their force in one.
     Keeping in awe the Bay of Portingale,
     And all the ocean by the British 184 shore;
     And by this means I'll win the world at last.

     BAJAZETH. Yet set a ransom on me, Tamburlaine.

     TAMBURLAINE. What, think'st thou Tamburlaine esteems thy gold?
     I'll make the kings of India, ere I die,
     Offer their mines, to sue for peace, to me,
     And dig for treasure to appease my wrath.—
     Come, bind them both, and one lead in the Turk;
     The Turkess let my love's maid lead away,

          [They bind them.]

     BAJAZETH. Ah, villains, dare you touch my sacred arms?—
     O Mahomet!  O sleepy Mahomet!

     ZABINA. O cursed Mahomet, that mak'st us thus
     The slaves to Scythians rude and barbarous!

     TAMBURLAINE. Come, bring them in; and for this happy conquest
     Triumph, and solemnize a martial 185 feast.

          [Exeunt.]




ACT IV.





SCENE I.

          Enter the SOLDAN OF EGYPT, CAPOLIN, LORDS, and a MESSENGER.

     SOLDAN. Awake, ye men of Memphis! 186 hear the clang
     Of Scythian trumpets; hear the basilisks, 187
     That, roaring, shake Damascus' turrets down!
     The rogue of Volga holds Zenocrate,
     The Soldan's daughter, for his concubine,
     And, with a troop of thieves and vagabonds,
     Hath spread his colours to our high disgrace,
     While you, faint-hearted base Egyptians,
     Lie slumbering on the flowery banks of Nile,
     As crocodiles that unaffrighted rest
     While thundering cannons rattle on their skins.

     MESSENGER. Nay, mighty Soldan, did your greatness see
     The frowning looks of fiery Tamburlaine,
     That with his terror and imperious eyes
     Commands the hearts of his associates,
     It might amaze your royal majesty.

     SOLDAN. Villain, I tell thee, were that Tamburlaine
     As monstrous 188 as Gorgon prince of hell,
     The Soldan would not start a foot from him.
     But speak, what power hath he?

     MESSENGER. Mighty lord,
     Three hundred thousand men in armour clad,
     Upon their prancing steeds, disdainfully
     With wanton paces trampling on the ground;
     Five hundred thousand footmen threatening shot,
     Shaking their swords, their spears, and iron bills,
     Environing their standard round, that stood
     As bristle-pointed as a thorny wood;
     Their warlike engines and munition
     Exceed the forces of their martial men.

     SOLDAN. Nay, could their numbers countervail the stars,
     Or ever-drizzling 189 drops of April showers,
     Or wither'd leaves that autumn shaketh down,
     Yet would the Soldan by his conquering power
     So scatter and consume them in his rage,
     That not a man should 190 live to rue their fall.

     CAPOLIN. So might your highness, had you time to sort
     Your fighting men, and raise your royal host;
     But Tamburlaine by expedition
     Advantage takes of your unreadiness.

     SOLDAN. Let him take all th' advantages he can:
     Were all the world conspir'd to fight for him,
     Nay, were he devil, 191 as he is no man,
     Yet in revenge of fair Zenocrate,
     Whom he detaineth in despite of us,
     This arm should send him down to Erebus,
     To shroud his shame in darkness of the night.

     MESSENGER. Pleaseth your mightiness to understand,
     His resolution far exceedeth all.
     The first day when he pitcheth down his tents,
     White is their hue, and on his silver crest
     A snowy feather spangled-white he bears,
     To signify the mildness of his mind,
     That, satiate with spoil, refuseth blood:
     But, when Aurora mounts the second time,
     As red as scarlet is his furniture;
     Then must his kindled wrath be quench'd with blood,
     Not sparing any that can manage arms:
     But, if these threats move not submission,
     Black are his colours, black pavilion;
     His spear, his shield, his horse, his armour, plumes,
     And jetty feathers, menace death and hell;
     Without respect of sex, degree, or age,
     He razeth all his foes with fire and sword.

     SOLDAN. Merciless villain, peasant, ignorant
     Of lawful arms or martial discipline!
     Pillage and murder are his usual trades:
     The slave usurps the glorious name of war.
     See, Capolin, the fair Arabian king, 192
     That hath been disappointed by this slave
     Of my fair daughter and his princely love,
     May have fresh warning to go war with us,
     And be reveng'd for her disparagement.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE,
          ZENOCRATE, ANIPPE, two MOORS drawing BAJAZETH in a cage,
          and ZABINA following him.

     TAMBURLAINE. Bring out my footstool.

          [They take BAJAZETH out of the cage.]

     BAJAZETH. Ye holy priests of heavenly Mahomet,
     That, sacrificing, slice and cut your flesh,
     Staining his altars with your purple blood,
     Make heaven to frown, and every fixed star
     To suck up poison from the moorish fens,
     And pour it 193 in this glorious tyrant's throat!

     TAMBURLAINE. The chiefest god, first mover of that sphere
     Enchas'd with thousands ever-shining lamps,
     Will sooner burn the glorious frame of heaven
     Than it should 194 so conspire my overthrow.
     But, villain, thou that wishest this 195 to me,
     Fall prostrate on the low disdainful earth,
     And be the footstool of great Tamburlaine,
     That I may rise into 196 my royal throne.

     BAJAZETH. First shalt thou rip my bowels with thy sword,
     And sacrifice my heart 197 to death and hell,
     Before I yield to such a slavery.

     TAMBURLAINE. Base villain, vassal, slave to Tamburlaine,
     Unworthy to embrace or touch the ground
     That bears the honour of my royal weight;
     Stoop, villain, stoop! stoop; 198 for so he bids
     That may command thee piecemeal to be torn,
     Or scatter'd like the lofty cedar-trees
     Struck with the voice of thundering Jupiter.

     BAJAZETH. Then, as I look down to the damned fiends,
     Fiends, look on me! and thou, dread god of hell,
     With ebon sceptre strike this hateful earth,
     And make it swallow both of us at once!

          [TAMBURLAINE gets up on him into his chair.]

     TAMBURLAINE. Now clear the triple region of the air,
     And let the Majesty of Heaven behold
     Their scourge and terror tread on emperors.
     Smile, stars that reign'd at my nativity,
     And dim the brightness of your 199 neighbour lamps;
     Disdain to borrow light of Cynthia!
     For I, the chiefest lamp of all the earth,
     First rising in the east with mild aspect,
     But fixed now in the meridian line,
     Will send up fire to your turning spheres,
     And cause the sun to borrow light of you.
     My sword struck fire from his coat of steel,
     Even in Bithynia, when I took this Turk;
     As when a fiery exhalation,
     Wrapt in the bowels of a freezing cloud,
     Fighting for passage, make[s] the welkin crack,
     And casts a flash of lightning to 200 the earth:
     But, ere I march to wealthy Persia,
     Or leave Damascus and th' Egyptian fields,
     As was the fame of Clymene's brain-sick son
     That almost brent 201 the axle-tree of heaven,
     So shall our swords, our lances, and our shot
     Fill all the air with fiery meteors;
     Then, when the sky shall wax as red as blood,
     It shall be said I made it red myself,
     To make me think of naught but blood and war.

     ZABINA. Unworthy king, that by thy cruelty
     Unlawfully usurp'st the Persian seat,
     Dar'st thou, that never saw an emperor
     Before thou met my husband in the field,
     Being thy captive, thus abuse his state,
     Keeping his kingly body in a cage,
     That roofs of gold and sun-bright palaces
     Should have prepar'd to entertain his grace?
     And treading him beneath thy loathsome feet,
     Whose feet the kings 202 of Africa have kiss'd?

     TECHELLES. You must devise some torment worse, my lord,
     To make these captives rein their lavish tongues.

     TAMBURLAINE. Zenocrate, look better to your slave.

     ZENOCRATE. She is my handmaid's slave, and she shall look
     That these abuses flow not from 203 her tongue.—
     Chide her, Anippe.

     ANIPPE. Let these be warnings, then, for you, 204 my slave,
     How you abuse the person of the king;
     Or else I swear to have you whipt stark nak'd. 205

     BAJAZETH. Great Tamburlaine, great in my overthrow,
     Ambitious pride shall make thee fall as low,
     For treading on the back of Bajazeth,
     That should be horsed on four mighty kings.

     TAMBURLAINE. Thy names, and titles, and thy dignities 206
     Are fled from Bajazeth, and remain with me,
     That will maintain it 'gainst a world of kings.—
     Put him in again.

          [They put him into the cage.]

     BAJAZETH. Is this a place for mighty Bajazeth?
     Confusion light on him that helps thee thus!

     TAMBURLAINE. There, whiles 207 he lives, shall Bajazeth be kept;
     And, where I go, be thus in triumph drawn;
     And thou, his wife, shalt 208 feed him with the scraps
     My servitors shall bring thee from my board;
     For he that gives him other food than this,
     Shall sit by him, and starve to death himself:
     This is my mind, and I will have it so.
     Not all the kings and emperors of the earth,
     If they would lay their crowne before my feet,
     Shall ransom him, or take him from his cage:
     The ages that shall talk of Tamburlaine,
     Even from this day to Plato's wondrous year,
     Shall talk how I have handled Bajazeth:
     These Moors, that drew him from Bithynia
     To fair Damascus, where we now remain,
     Shall lead him with us wheresoe'er we go.—
     Techelles, and my loving followers,
     Now may we see Damascus' lofty towers,
     Like to the shadows of Pyramides
     That with their beauties grace 209 the Memphian fields.
     The golden stature 210 of their feather'd bird, 211
     That spreads her wings upon the city-walls,
     Shall not defend it from our battering shot:
     The townsmen mask in silk and cloth of gold,
     And every house is as a treasury;
     The men, the treasure, and the town are 212 ours.

     THERIDAMAS. Your tents of white now pitch'd before the gates,
     And gentle flags of amity display'd,
     I doubt not but the governor will yield,
     Offering Damascus to your majesty.

     TAMBURLAINE. So shall he have his life, and all the rest:
     But, if he stay until the bloody flag
     Be once advanc'd on my vermilion tent,
     He dies, and those that kept us out so long;
     And, when they see me march in black array,
     With mournful streamers hanging down their heads,
     Were in that city all the world contain'd,
     Not one should scape, but perish by our swords.

     ZENOCRATE. Yet would you have some pity for my sake,
     Because it is my country 213 and my father's.

     TAMBURLAINE. Not for the world, Zenocrate, if I have sworn.—
     Come; bring in the Turk.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter SOLDAN, KING OF ARABIA, 214 CAPOLIN, and SOLDIERS,
          with streaming colours.

     SOLDAN. Methinks we march as Meleager did,
     Environed with brave Argolian knights,
     To chase the savage Calydonian 215 boar,
     Or Cephalus, with lusty 216 Theban youths,
     Against the wolf that angry Themis sent
     To waste and spoil the sweet Aonian fields.
     A monster of five hundred thousand heads,
     Compact of rapine, piracy, and spoil,
     The scum of men, the hate and scourge of God,
     Raves in Aegyptia, and annoyeth us:
     My lord, it is the bloody Tamburlaine,
     A sturdy felon, and 217 a base-bred thief,
     By murder raised to the Persian crown,
     That dare control us in our territories.
     To tame the pride of this presumptuous beast,
     Join your Arabians with the Soldan's power;
     Let us unite our royal bands in one,
     And hasten to remove Damascus' siege.
     It is a blemish to the majesty
     And high estate of mighty emperors,
     That such a base usurping vagabond
     Should brave a king, or wear a princely crown.

     KING OF ARABIA. Renowmed 218 Soldan, have you lately heard
     The overthrow of mighty Bajazeth
     About the confines of Bithynia?
     The slavery wherewith he persecutes
     The noble Turk and his great emperess?

     SOLDAN. I have, and sorrow for his bad success;
     But, noble lord of great Arabia,
     Be so persuaded that the Soldan is
     No more dismay'd with tidings of his fall,
     Than in the haven when the pilot stands,
     And views a stranger's ship rent in the winds,
     And shivered against a craggy rock:
     Yet in compassion to his wretched state,
     A sacred vow to heaven and him I make,
     Confirming it with Ibis' holy name, 219
     That Tamburlaine shall rue the day, the 220 hour,
     Wherein he wrought such ignominious wrong
     Unto the hallow'd person of a prince,
     Or kept the fair Zenocrate so long,
     As concubine, I fear, to feed his lust.

     KING OF ARABIA. Let grief and fury hasten on revenge;
     Let Tamburlaine for his offences feel
     Such plagues as heaven and we can pour on him:
     I long to break my spear upon his crest,
     And prove the weight of his victorious arm;
     For fame, I fear, hath been too prodigal
     In sounding through the world his partial praise.

     SOLDAN. Capolin, hast thou survey'd our powers?

     CAPOLIN. Great emperors of Egypt and Arabia,
     The number of your hosts united is,
     A hundred and fifty thousand horse,
     Two hundred thousand foot, brave men-at-arms,
     Courageous and 221 full of hardiness,
     As frolic as the hunters in the chase
     Of savage beasts amid the desert woods.

     KING OF ARABIA. My mind presageth fortunate success;
     And, Tamburlaine, my spirit doth foresee
     The utter ruin of thy men and thee.

     SOLDAN. Then rear your standards; let your sounding drums
     Direct our soldiers to Damascus' walls.—
     Now, Tamburlaine, the mighty Soldan comes,
     And leads with him the great Arabian king,
     To dim thy baseness and 222 obscurity,
     Famous for nothing but for theft and spoil;
     To raze and scatter thy inglorious crew
     Of Scythians and slavish Persians.

          [Exeunt.]




SCENE IV.

          A banquet set out; and to it come TAMBURLAINE all in
          scarlet, ZENOCRATE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE,
          BAJAZETH drawn in his cage, ZABINA, and others.

     TAMBURLAINE. Now hang our bloody colours by Damascus,
     Reflexing hues of blood upon their heads,
     While they walk quivering on their city-walls,
     Half-dead for fear before they feel my wrath.
     Then let us freely banquet, and carouse
     Full bowls of wine unto the god of war,
     That means to fill your helmets full of gold,
     And make Damascus' spoils as rich to you
     As was to Jason Colchos' golden fleece.—
     And now, Bajazeth, hast thou any stomach?

     BAJAZETH. Ay, such a stomach, cruel Tamburlaine, as I could
     willingly feed upon thy blood-raw heart.

     TAMBURLAINE. Nay, thine own is easier to come by:  pluck out
     that; and 'twill serve thee and thy wife.—Well, Zenocrate,
     Techelles, and the rest, fall to your victuals.

     BAJAZETH. Fall to, and never may your meat digest!—
     Ye Furies, that can mask 223 invisible,
     Dive to the bottom of Avernus' pool,
     And in your hands bring hellish poison up,
     And squeeze it in the cup of Tamburlaine!
     Or, winged snakes of Lerna, cast your stings,
     And leave your venoms in this tyrant's dish?

     ZABINA. And may this banquet prove as ominous
     As Progne's to th' adulterous Thracian king
     That fed upon the substance of his child!

     ZENOCRATE. My lord, 224 how can you suffer these
     Outrageous curses by these slaves of yours?

     TAMBURLAINE. To let them see, divine Zenocrate,
     I glory in the curses of my foes,
     Having the power from the empyreal heaven
     To turn them all upon their proper heads.

     TECHELLES. I pray you, give them leave, madam; this speech
     is a goodly refreshing for them. 225

     THERIDAMAS. But, if his highness would let them be fed,
     it would do them more good.

     TAMBURLAINE. Sirrah, why fall you not to? are you so daintily
     brought up, you cannot eat your own flesh?

     BAJAZETH. First, legions of devils shall tear thee in pieces.

     USUMCASANE. Villain, knowest thou to whom thou speakest?

     TAMBURLAINE. O, let him alone.—Here; 226 eat, sir; take it
     from 227 my sword's point, or I'll thrust it to thy heart.

          [BAJAZETH takes the food, and stamps upon it.]

     THERIDAMAS. He stamps it under his feet, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE. Take it up, villain, and eat it; or I will make thee
     slice 228 the brawns of thy arms into carbonadoes and eat them.

     USUMCASANE. Nay, 'twere better he killed his wife, and then she
     shall be sure not to be starved, and he be provided for a month's
     victual beforehand.

     TAMBURLAINE. Here is my dagger:  despatch her while she is fat;
     for, if she live but a while longer, she will fall 229 into a
     consumption with fretting, and then she will not be worth the
     eating.

     THERIDAMAS. Dost thou think that Mahomet will suffer this?

     TECHELLES. 'Tis like he will, when he cannot let 230 it.

     TAMBURLAINE. Go to; fall to your meat.  What, not a bit!—Belike
     he hath not been watered to-day:  give him some drink.

          [They give BAJAZETH water to drink, and he flings it on
          the ground.]

     Fast, and welcome, sir, while 231 hunger make you eat.—How now,
     Zenocrate! doth not the Turk and his wife make a goodly show at a
     banquet?

     ZENOCRATE. Yes, my lord.

     THERIDAMAS.
     Methinks 'tis a great deal better than a consort 232 of music.

     TAMBURLAINE. Yet music would do well to cheer up Zenocrate.
     Pray thee, tell why art thou so sad? if thou wilt have a song,
     the Turk shall strain his voice:  but why is it?

     ZENOCRATE. My lord, to see my father's town besieg'd,
     The country wasted where myself was born,
     How can it but afflict my very soul?
     If any love remain in you, my lord,
     Or if my love unto your majesty
     May merit favour at your highness' hands,
     Then raise your siege from fair Damascus' walls,
     And with my father take a friendly truce.

     TAMBURLAINE. Zenocrate, were Egypt Jove's own land,
     Yet would I with my sword make Jove to stoop.
     I will confute those blind geographers
     That make a triple region in the world,
     Excluding regions which I mean to trace,
     And with this pen 233 reduce them to a map,
     Calling the provinces, cities, and towns,
     After my name and thine, Zenocrate:
     Here at Damascus will I make the point
     That shall begin the perpendicular:
     And wouldst thou have me buy thy father's love
     With such a loss? tell me, Zenocrate.

     ZENOCRATE. Honour still wait on happy Tamburlaine!
     Yet give me leave to plead for him, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE. Content thyself:  his person shall be safe,
     And all the friends of fair Zenocrate,
     If with their lives they will be pleas'd to yield,
     Or may be forc'd to make me emperor;
     For Egypt and Arabia must be mine.—
     Feed, you slave; thou mayst think thyself happy to be fed from
     my trencher.

     BAJAZETH. My empty stomach, full of idle heat,
     Draws bloody humours from my feeble parts,
     Preserving life by hastening 234 cruel death.
     My veins are pale; my sinews hard and dry;
     My joints benumb'd; unless I eat, I die.

     ZABINA. Eat, Bajazeth; let us live in spite of them, looking
     some happy power will pity and enlarge us.

     TAMBURLAINE. Here, Turk; wilt thou have a clean trencher?

     BAJAZETH. Ay, tyrant, and more meat.

     TAMBURLAINE. Soft, sir! you must be dieted; too much eating
     will make you surfeit.

     THERIDAMAS. So it would, my lord, 'specially 235 having so small
     a walk and so little exercise.

          [A second course is brought in of crowns.]

     TAMBURLAINE. Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane, here are the
     cates you desire to finger, are they not?

     THERIDAMAS. Ay, my lord:  but none save kings must feed with
     these.

     TECHELLES. 'Tis enough for us to see them, and for Tamburlaine
     only to enjoy them.

     TAMBURLAINE. Well; here is now to the Soldan of Egypt, the King
     of Arabia, and the Governor of Damascus.   Now, take these three
     crowns, and pledge me, my contributory kings.  I crown you here,
     Theridamas, king of Argier; Techelles, king of Fez; and
     Usumcasane, king of Morocco. 236—How say you to this, Turk? these are
     not your contributory kings.

     BAJAZETH. Nor shall they long be thine, I warrant them.

     TAMBURLAINE. Kings of Argier, Morocco, and of Fez,
     You that have march'd with happy Tamburlaine
     As far as from the frozen plage 237 of heaven
     Unto the watery Morning's ruddy bower,
     And thence by land unto the torrid zone,
     Deserve these titles I endow you with
     By valour 238 and by magnanimity.
     Your births shall be no blemish to your fame;
     For virtue is the fount whence honour springs,
     And they are worthy she investeth kings.

     THERIDAMAS. And, since your highness hath so well vouchsaf'd,
     If we deserve them not with higher meeds
     Than erst our states and actions have retain'd,
     Take them away again, 239 and make us slaves.

     TAMBURLAINE. Well said, Theridamas:  when holy Fates
     Shall stablish me in strong Aegyptia,
     We mean to travel to th' antarctic pole,
     Conquering the people underneath our feet,
     And be renowm'd 240 as never emperors were.—
     Zenocrate, I will not crown thee yet,
     Until with greater honours I be grac'd.

          [Exeunt.]




ACT V.





SCENE I.

          Enter the GOVERNOR OF DAMASCUS 241 with three or four
          CITIZENS, and four VIRGINS with branches of laurel in
          their hands.

     GOVERNOR. Still doth this man, or rather god of war,
     Batter our walls and beat our turrets down;
     And to resist with longer stubbornness,
     Or hope of rescue from the Soldan's power,
     Were but to bring our wilful overthrow,
     And make us desperate of our threaten'd lives.
     We see his tents have now been altered
     With terrors to the last and cruel'st hue;
     His coal-black colours, every where advanc'd,
     Threaten our city with a general spoil;
     And, if we should with common rites of arms
     Offer our safeties to his clemency,
     I fear the custom proper to his sword,
     Which he observes as parcel of his fame,
     Intending so to terrify the world,
     By any innovation or remorse 242
     Will never be dispens'd with till our deaths.
     Therefore, for these our harmless virgins' sakes, 243
     Whose honours and whose lives rely on him,
     Let us have hope that their unspotted prayers,
     Their blubber'd 244 cheeks, and hearty humble moans,
     Will melt his fury into some remorse,
     And use us like a loving conqueror. 245

     FIRST VIRGIN. If humble suite or imprecations
     (Utter'd with tears of wretchedness and blood
     Shed from the heads and hearts of all our sex,
     Some made your wives, and some your children,)
     Might have entreated your obdurate breasts
     To entertain some care 246 of our securities
     Whiles only danger beat upon our walls,
     These more than dangerous warrants of our death
     Had never been erected as they be,
     Nor you depend on such weak helps 247 as we.

     GOVERNOR. Well, lovely virgins, think our country's care,
     Our love of honour, loath to be enthrall'd
     To foreign powers and rough imperious yokes,
     Would not with too much cowardice or 248 fear,
     Before all hope of rescue were denied,
     Submit yourselves and us to servitude.
     Therefore, in that your safeties and our own,
     Your honours, liberties, and lives were weigh'd
     In equal care and balance with our own,
     Endure as we the malice of our stars,
     The wrath of Tamburlaine and power 249 of wars;
     Or be the means the overweighing heavens
     Have kept to qualify these hot extremes,
     And bring us pardon in your cheerful looks.

     SECOND VIRGIN. Then here, before the Majesty of Heaven
     And holy patrons of Aegyptia,
     With knees and hearts submissive we entreat
     Grace to our words and pity to our looks,
     That this device may prove propitious,
     And through the eyes and ears of Tamburlaine
     Convey events of mercy to his heart;
     Grant that these signs of victory we yield
     May bind the temples of his conquering head,
     To hide the folded furrows of his brows,
     And shadow his displeased countenance
     With happy looks of ruth and lenity.
     Leave us, my lord, and loving countrymen:
     What simple virgins may persuade, we will.

     GOVERNOR. Farewell, sweet virgins, on whose safe return
     Depends our city, liberty, and lives.

          [Exeunt all except the VIRGINS.]

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, all in black and very melancholy,
          TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE, with others.

     TAMBURLAINE. What, are the turtles fray'd out of their nests?
     Alas, poor fools, must you be first shall feel
     The sworn destruction of Damascus?
     They knew 250 my custom; could they not as well
     Have sent ye out when first my milk-white flags,
     Through which sweet Mercy threw her gentle beams,
     Reflexed 251 them on their 252 disdainful eyes,
     As 253 now when fury and incensed hate
     Flings slaughtering terror from my coal-black tents, 254
     And tells for truth submission 255 comes too late?

     FIRST VIRGIN. Most happy king and emperor of the earth,
     Image of honour and nobility,
     For whom the powers divine have made the world,
     And on whose throne the holy Graces sit;
     In whose sweet person is compris'd the sum
     Of Nature's skill and heavenly majesty;
     Pity our plights!  O, pity poor Damascus!
     Pity old age, within whose silver hairs
     Honour and reverence evermore have reign'd!
     Pity the marriage-bed, where many a lord,
     In prime and glory of his loving joy,
     Embraceth now with tears of ruth and 256 blood
     The jealous body of his fearful wife,
     Whose cheeks and hearts, so punish'd with conceit, 257
     To think thy puissant never-stayed arm
     Will part their bodies, and prevent their souls
     From heavens of comfort yet their age might bear,
     Now wax all pale and wither'd to the death,
     As well for grief our ruthless governor
     Hath 258 thus refus'd the mercy of thy hand,
     (Whose sceptre angels kiss and Furies dread,)
     As for their liberties, their loves, or lives!
     O, then, for these, and such as we ourselves,
     For us, for infants, and for all our bloods,
     That never nourish'd 259 thought against thy rule,
     Pity, O, pity, sacred emperor,
     The prostrate service of this wretched town;
     And take in sign thereof this gilded wreath,
     Whereto each man of rule hath given his hand,
     And wish'd, 260 as worthy subjects, happy means
     To be investers of thy royal brows
     Even with the true Egyptian diadem!

     TAMBURLAINE. Virgins, in vain you labour to prevent
     That which mine honour swears shall be perform'd.
     Behold my sword; what see you at the point?

     FIRST VIRGIN. Nothing but fear and fatal steel, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE. Your fearful minds are thick and misty, then,
     For there sits Death; there sits imperious 261 Death,
     Keeping his circuit by the slicing edge.
     But I am pleas'd you shall not see him there;
     He now is seated on my horsemen's spears,
     And on their points his fleshless body feeds.—
     Techelles, straight go charge a few of them
     To charge these dames, and shew my servant Death,
     Sitting in scarlet on their armed spears.

     VIRGINS. O, pity us!

     TAMBURLAINE. Away with them, I say, and shew them Death!
          [The VIRGINS are taken out by TECHELLES and others.]
     I will not spare these proud Egyptians,
     Nor change my martial observations
     For all the wealth of Gihon's golden waves,
     Or for the love of Venus, would she leave
     The angry god of arms and lie with me.
     They have refus'd the offer of their lives,
     And know my customs are as peremptory
     As wrathful planets, death, or destiny.

          Re-enter TECHELLES.

     What, have your horsemen shown the virgins Death?

     TECHELLES. They have, my lord, and on Damascus' walls
     Have hoisted up their slaughter'd carcasses.

     TAMBURLAINE. A sight as baneful to their souls, I think,
     As are Thessalian drugs or mithridate:
     But go, my lords, put the rest to the sword.

          [Exeunt all except TAMBURLAINE.]

     Ah, fair Zenocrate!—divine Zenocrate!
     Fair is too foul an epithet for thee,—
     That in thy passion 262 for thy country's love,
     And fear to see thy kingly father's harm,
     With hair dishevell'd wip'st thy watery cheeks;
     And, like to Flora in her morning's pride,
     Shaking her silver tresses in the air,
     Rain'st on the earth resolved 263 pearl in showers,
     And sprinklest sapphires on thy shining face,
     Where Beauty, mother to the Muses, sits,
     And comments volumes with her ivory pen,
     Taking instructions from thy flowing eyes;
     Eyes, when that Ebena steps to heaven, 264
     In silence of thy solemn evening's walk,
     Making the mantle of the richest night,
     The moon, the planets, and the meteors, light;
     There angels in their crystal armours fight 265
     A doubtful battle with my tempted thoughts
     For Egypt's freedom and the Soldan's life,
     His life that so consumes Zenocrate;
     Whose sorrows lay more siege unto my soul
     Than all my army to Damascus' walls;
     And neither Persia's 266 sovereign nor the Turk
     Troubled my senses with conceit of foil
     So much by much as doth Zenocrate.
     What is beauty, saith my sufferings, then?
     If all the pens that ever poets held
     Had fed the feeling of their masters' thoughts,
     And every sweetness that inspir'd their hearts,
     Their minds, and muses on admired themes;
     If all the heavenly quintessence they still 267
     From their immortal flowers of poesy,
     Wherein, as in a mirror, we perceive
     The highest reaches of a human wit;
     If these had made one poem's period,
     And all combin'd in beauty's worthiness,
     Yet should there hover in their restless heads
     One thought, one grace, one wonder, at the least,
     Which into words no virtue can digest.
     But how unseemly is it for my sex,
     My discipline of arms and chivalry,
     My nature, and the terror of my name,
     To harbour thoughts effeminate and faint!
     Save only that in beauty's just applause,
     With whose instinct the soul of man is touch'd;
     And every warrior that is rapt with love
     Of fame, of valour, and of victory,
     Must needs have beauty beat on his conceits:
     I thus conceiving, 268 and subduing both,
     That which hath stoop'd the chiefest of the gods,
     Even from the fiery-spangled veil of heaven,
     To feel the lovely warmth of shepherds' flames,
     And mask in cottages of strowed reeds,
     Shall give the world to note, for all my birth,
     That virtue solely is the sum of glory,
     And fashions men with true nobility.—
     Who's within there?

          Enter ATTENDANTS.

     Hath Bajazeth been fed to-day?

     ATTEND. 269 Ay, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE. Bring him forth; and let us know if the town be
     ransacked.

          [Exeunt ATTENDANTS.]

          Enter TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE, and others.

     TECHELLES. The town is ours, my lord, and fresh supply
     Of conquest and of spoil is offer'd us.

     TAMBURLAINE. That's well, Techelles.  What's the news?

     TECHELLES. The Soldan and the Arabian king together
     March on us with 270 such eager violence
     As if there were no way but one with us. 271

     TAMBURLAINE. No more there is not, I warrant thee, Techelles.

          ATTENDANTS bring in BAJAZETH in his cage, followed by
          ZABINA.
          Exeunt ATTENDANTS.

     THERIDAMAS. We know the victory is ours, my lord;
     But let us save the reverend Soldan's life
     For fair Zenocrate that so laments his state.

     TAMBURLAINE. That will we chiefly see unto, Theridamas,
     For sweet Zenocrate, whose worthiness
     Deserves a conquest over every heart.—
     And now, my footstool, if I lose the field,
     You hope of liberty and restitution?—
     Here let him stay, my masters, from the tents,
     Till we have made us ready for the field.—
     Pray for us, Bajazeth; we are going.
          [Exeunt all except BAJAZETH and ZABINA.]

     BAJAZETH. Go, never to return with victory!
     Millions of men encompass thee about,
     And gore thy body with as many wounds!
     Sharp forked arrows light upon thy horse!
     Furies from the black Cocytus' lake,
     Break up the earth, and with their fire-brands
     Enforce thee run upon the baneful pikes!
     Vollies of shot pierce through thy charmed skin,
     And every bullet dipt in poison'd drugs!
     Or roaring cannons sever all thy joints,
     Making thee mount as high as eagles soar!

     ZABINA. Let all the swords and lances in the field
     Stick in his breast as in their proper rooms!
     At every pore 272 let blood come dropping forth,
     That lingering pains may massacre his heart,
     And madness send his damned soul to hell!

     BAJAZETH. Ah, fair Zabina! we may curse his power,
     The heavens may frown, the earth for anger quake;
     But such a star hath influence in 273 his sword
     As rules the skies and countermands the gods
     More than Cimmerian Styx or Destiny:
     And then shall we in this detested guise,
     With shame, with hunger, and with horror stay, 274
     Griping our bowels with retorqued 275 thoughts,
     And have no hope to end our ecstasies.

     ZABINA. Then is there left no Mahomet, no God,
     No fiend, no fortune, nor no hope of end
     To our infamous, monstrous slaveries.
     Gape, earth, and let the fiends infernal view
     A 276 hell as hopeless and as full of fear
     As are the blasted banks of Erebus,
     Where shaking ghosts with ever-howling groans
     Hover about the ugly ferryman,
     To get a passage to Elysium! 277
     Why should we live?—O, wretches, beggars, slaves!—
     Why live we, Bajazeth, and build up nests
     So high within the region of the air,
     By living long in this oppression,
     That all the world will see and laugh to scorn
     The former triumphs of our mightiness
     In this obscure infernal servitude?

     BAJAZETH. O life, more loathsome to my vexed thoughts 278
     Than noisome parbreak 279 of the Stygian snakes,
     Which fills the nooks of hell with standing air,
     Infecting all the ghosts with cureless griefs!
     O dreary engines of my loathed sight,
     That see my crown, my honour, and my name
     Thrust under yoke and thraldom of a thief,
     Why feed ye still on day's accursed beams,
     And sink not quite into my tortur'd soul?
     You see my wife, my queen, and emperess,
     Brought up and propped by the hand of Fame,
     Queen of fifteen contributory queens,
     Now thrown to rooms of black abjection, 280
     Smeared with blots of basest drudgery,
     And villainess 281 to shame, disdain, and misery.
     Accursed Bajazeth, whose words of ruth, 282
     That would with pity cheer Zabina's heart,
     And make our souls resolve 283 in ceaseless tears,
     Sharp hunger bites upon and gripes the root
     From whence the issues of my thoughts do break!
     O poor Zabina!  O my queen, my queen!
     Fetch me some water for my burning breast,
     To cool and comfort me with longer date,
     That, in the shorten'd sequel of my life,
     I may pour forth my soul into thine arms
     With words of love, whose moaning intercourse
     Hath hitherto been stay'd with wrath and hate
     Of our expressless bann'd 284 inflictions.

     ZABINA. Sweet Bajazeth, I will prolong thy life
     As long as any blood or spark of breath
     Can quench or cool the torments of my grief.

          [Exit.]

     BAJAZETH. Now, Bajazeth, abridge thy baneful days,
     And beat the 285 brains out of thy conquer'd head,
     Since other means are all forbidden me,
     That may be ministers of my decay.
     O highest lamp of ever-living 286 Jove,
     Accursed day, infected with my griefs,
     Hide now thy stained face in endless night,
     And shut the windows of the lightsome heavens!
     Let ugly Darkness with her rusty coach,
     Engirt with tempests, wrapt in pitchy clouds,
     Smother the earth with never-fading mists,
     And let her horses from their nostrils breathe
     Rebellious winds and dreadful thunder-claps,
     That in this terror Tamburlaine may live,
     And my pin'd soul, resolv'd in liquid air,
     May still excruciate his tormented thoughts!
     Then let the stony dart of senseless cold
     Pierce through the centre of my wither'd heart,
     And make a passage for my loathed life!

          [He brains himself against the cage.]

          Re-enter ZABINA.

     ZABINA. What do mine eyes behold? my husband dead!
     His skull all riven in twain! his brains dash'd out,
     The brains of Bajazeth, my lord and sovereign!
     O Bajazeth, my husband and my lord!
     O Bajazeth!  O Turk!  O emperor!
     Give him his liquor? not I.  Bring milk and fire, and my blood
     I bring him again.—Tear me in pieces—give 287 me the sword
     with a ball of wild-fire upon it.—Down with him! down with
     him!—Go to my child; away, away, away! ah, save that infant!
     save him, save him!—I, even I, speak to her. 288—The sun was
     down—streamers white, red, black—Here, here, here!—Fling the
     meat in his face—Tamburlaine, Tamburlaine!—Let the soldiers be
     buried.—Hell, death, Tamburlaine, 289 hell!—Make ready my
     coach, 290 my chair, my jewels.—I come, I come, I come! 291

          [She runs against the cage, and brains herself.]

          Enter ZENOCRATE with ANIPPE.

     ZENOCRATE. Wretched Zenocrate! that liv'st to see
     Damascus' walls dy'd with Egyptians' 292 blood,
     Thy father's subjects and thy countrymen;
     The 293 streets strow'd with dissever'd joints of men,
     And wounded bodies gasping yet for life;
     But most accurs'd, to see the sun-bright troop
     Of heavenly virgins and unspotted maids
     (Whose looks might make the angry god of arms
     To break his sword and mildly treat of love)
     On horsemen's lances to be hoisted up,
     And guiltlessly endure a cruel death;
     For every fell and stout Tartarian steed,
     That stamp'd on others with their thundering hoofs,
     When all their riders charg'd their quivering spears,
     Began to check the ground and rein themselves,
     Gazing upon the beauty of their looks.
     Ah, Tamburlaine, wert thou the cause of this,
     That term'st Zenocrate thy dearest love?
     Whose lives were dearer to Zenocrate
     Than her own life, or aught save thine own love.
     But see, another bloody spectacle!
     Ah, wretched eyes, the enemies of my heart,
     How are ye glutted with these grievous objects,
     And tell my soul more tales of bleeding ruth!—
     See, see, Anippe, if they breathe or no.

     ANIPPE. No breath, nor sense, nor motion, in them both:
     Ah, madam, this their slavery hath enforc'd,
     And ruthless cruelty of Tamburlaine!

     ZENOCRATE. Earth, cast up fountains from thy 294 entrails,
     And wet thy cheeks for their untimely deaths;
     Shake with their weight in sign of fear and grief!
     Blush, heaven, that gave them honour at their birth,
     And let them die a death so barbarous!
     Those that are proud of fickle empery
     And place their chiefest good in earthly pomp,
     Behold the Turk and his great emperess!
     Ah, Tamburlaine my love, sweet Tamburlaine,
     That fight'st for sceptres and for slippery crowns,
     Behold the Turk and his great emperess!
     Thou that, in conduct of thy happy stars,
     Sleep'st every night with conquest on thy brows,
     And yet wouldst shun the wavering turns of war, 295
     In fear and feeling of the like distress
     Behold the Turk and his great emperess!
     Ah, mighty Jove and holy Mahomet,
     Pardon my love!  O, pardon his contempt
     Of earthly fortune and respect of pity;
     And let not conquest, ruthlessly pursu'd,
     Be equally against his life incens'd
     In this great Turk and hapless emperess!
     And pardon me that was not mov'd with ruth
     To see them live so long in misery!—
     Ah, what may chance to thee, Zenocrate?

     ANIPPE. Madam, content yourself, and be resolv'd
     Your love hath Fortune so at his command,
     That she shall stay, and turn her wheel no more,
     As long as life maintains his mighty arm
     That fights for honour to adorn your head.

          Enter PHILEMUS.

     ZENOCRATE. What other heavy news now brings Philemus?

     PHILEMUS. Madam, your father, and the Arabian king,
     The first affecter of your excellence,
     Come 296 now, as Turnus 'gainst Aeneas did,
     Armed 297 with lance into the Aegyptian fields,
     Ready for battle 'gainst my lord the king.

     ZENOCRATE. Now shame and duty, love and fear present
     A thousand sorrows to my martyr'd soul.
     Whom should I wish the fatal victory,
     When my poor pleasures are divided thus,
     And rack'd by duty from my cursed heart?
     My father and my first-betrothed love
     Must fight against my life and present love;
     Wherein the change I use condemns my faith,
     And makes my deeds infamous through the world:
     But, as the gods, to end the Trojans' toil,
     Prevented Turnus of Lavinia,
     And fatally enrich'd Aeneas' love,
     So, for a final 298 issue to my griefs,
     To pacify my country and my love,
     Must Tamburlaine by their resistless powers,
     With virtue of a gentle victory,
     Conclude a league of honour to my hope;
     Then, as the powers divine have pre-ordain'd,
     With happy safety of my father's life
     Send like defence of fair Arabia

          [They sound to the battle within; and TAMBURLAINE enjoys
          the victory:  after which, the KING OF ARABIA 299 enters
          wounded.]

     KING OF ARABIA. What cursed power guides the murdering hands
     Of this infamous tyrant's soldiers,
     That no escape may save their enemies,
     Nor fortune keep themselves from victory?
     Lie down, Arabia, wounded to the death,
     And let Zenocrate's fair eyes behold,
     That, as for her thou bear'st these wretched arms,
     Even so for her thou diest in these arms,
     Leaving thy 300 blood for witness of thy love.

     ZENOCRATE. Too dear a witness for such love, my lord!
     Behold Zenocrate, the cursed object
     Whose fortunes never mastered her griefs;
     Behold her wounded in conceit 301 for thee,
     As much as thy fair body is for me!

     KING OF ARABIA. Then shall I die with full contented heart,
     Having beheld divine Zenocrate,
     Whose sight with joy would take away my life
     As now it bringeth sweetness to my wound,
     If I had not been wounded as I am.
     Ah, that the deadly pangs I suffer now
     Would lend an hour's licence to my tongue,
     To make discourse of some sweet accidents
     Have chanc'd thy merits in this worthless bondage,
     And that I might be privy to the state
     Of thy deserv'd contentment and thy love!
     But, making now a virtue of thy sight,
     To drive all sorrow from my fainting soul,
     Since death denies me further cause of joy,
     Depriv'd of care, my heart with comfort dies,
     Since thy desired hand shall close mine eyes.

          [Dies.]

          Re-enter TAMBURLAINE, leading the SOLDAN; TECHELLES,
          THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE, with others.

     TAMBURLAINE. Come, happy father of Zenocrate,
     A title higher than thy Soldan's name.
     Though my right hand have 302 thus enthralled thee,
     Thy princely daughter here shall set thee free;
     She that hath calm'd the fury of my sword,
     Which had ere this been bath'd in streams of blood
     As vast and deep as Euphrates 303 or Nile.

     ZENOCRATE. O sight thrice-welcome to my joyful soul,
     To see the king, my father, issue safe
     From dangerous battle of my conquering love!

     SOLDAN. Well met, my only dear Zenocrate,
     Though with the loss of Egypt and my crown!

     TAMBURLAINE. 'Twas I, my lord, that gat the victory;
     And therefore grieve not at your overthrow,
     Since I shall render all into your hands,
     And add more strength to your dominions
     Than ever yet confirm'd th' Egyptian crown.
     The god of war resigns his room to me,
     Meaning to make me general of the world:
     Jove, viewing me in arms, looks pale and wan,
     Fearing my power should 304 pull him from his throne:
     Where'er I come the Fatal Sisters sweat, 305
     And grisly Death, by running to and fro,
     To do their ceaseless homage to my sword:
     And here in Afric, where it seldom rains,
     Since I arriv'd with my triumphant host,
     Have swelling clouds, drawn from wide-gaping 306 wounds,
     Been oft resolv'd 307 in bloody purple showers,
     A meteor that might terrify the earth,
     And make it quake at every drop it drinks:
     Millions 308 of souls sit on the banks of Styx,
     Waiting the back-return of Charon's boat;
     Hell and Elysium 309 swarm with ghosts of men
     That I have sent from sundry foughten fields
     To spread my fame through hell and up to heaven:
     And see, my lord, a sight of strange import,—
     Emperors and kings lie breathless at my feet;
     The Turk and his great empress, as it seems,
     Left to themselves while we were at the fight,
     Have desperately despatch'd their slavish lives:
     With them Arabia, too, hath left his life:
     All sights of power to grace my victory;
     And such are objects fit for Tamburlaine,
     Wherein, as in a mirror, may be seen
     His honour, that consists in shedding blood
     When men presume to manage arms with him.

     SOLDAN. Mighty hath God and Mahomet made thy hand,
     Renowmed 310 Tamburlaine, to whom all kings
     Of force must yield their crowns and emperies;
     And I am pleas'd with this my overthrow,
     If, as beseems a person of thy state,
     Thou hast with honour us'd Zenocrate.

     TAMBURLAINE. Her state and person want no pomp, you see;
     And for all blot of foul inchastity,
     I record 311 heaven, her heavenly self is clear:
     Then let me find no further time 312 to grace
     Her princely temples with the Persian crown;
     But here these kings that on my fortunes wait,
     And have been crown'd for proved worthiness
     Even by this hand that shall establish them,
     Shall now, adjoining all their hands with mine,
     Invest her here the 313 Queen of Persia
     What saith the noble Soldan, and Zenocrate?

     SOLDAN. I yield with thanks and protestations
     Of endless honour to thee for her love.

     TAMBURLAINE. Then doubt I not 314 but fair Zenocrate
     Will soon consent to satisfy us both.

     ZENOCRATE. Else 315 should I much forget myself, my lord.

     THERIDAMAS. Then let us set the crown upon her head,
     That long hath linger'd for so high a seat.

     TECHELLES. My hand is ready to perform the deed;
     For now her marriage-time shall work us rest.

     USUMCASANE. And here's the crown, my lord; help set it on. 316

     TAMBURLAINE. Then sit thou down, divine Zenocrate;
     And here we crown thee Queen of Persia,
     And all the kingdoms and dominions
     That late the power of Tamburlaine subdu'd.
     As Juno, when the giants were suppress'd,
     That darted mountains at her brother Jove,
     So looks my love, shadowing in her brows
     Triumphs and trophies for my victories;
     Or as Latona's daughter, bent to arms,
     Adding more courage to my conquering mind.
     To gratify the[e], sweet Zenocrate,
     Egyptians, Moors, and men of Asia,
     From Barbary unto the Western India,
     Shall pay a yearly tribute to thy sire;
     And from the bounds of Afric to the banks
     Of Ganges shall his mighty arm extend.—
     And now, my lords and loving followers,
     That purchas'd kingdoms by your martial deeds,
     Cast off your armour, put on scarlet robes,
     Mount up your royal places of estate,
     Environed with troops of noblemen,
     And there make laws to rule your provinces:
     Hang up your weapons on Alcides' post[s];
     For Tamburlaine takes truce with all the world.—
     Thy first-betrothed love, Arabia,
     Shall we with honour, as beseems, 317 entomb
     With this great Turk and his fair emperess.
     Then, after all these solemn exequies,
     We will our rites 318 of marriage solemnize.

          [Exeunt.]


          Enter MACHIAVEL.

     MACHIAVEL. Albeit the world think Machiavel is dead,
     Yet was his soul but flown beyond the Alps;
     And, now the Guise 11 is dead, is come from France,
     To view this land, and frolic with his friends.
     To some perhaps my name is odious;
     But such as love me, guard me from their tongues,
     And let them know that I am Machiavel,
     And weigh not men, and therefore not men's words.
     Admir'd I am of those that hate me most:
     Though some speak openly against my books,
     Yet will they read me, and thereby attain
     To Peter's chair; and, when they cast me off,
     Are poison'd by my climbing followers.
     I count religion but a childish toy,
     And hold there is no sin but ignorance.
     Birds of the air will tell of murders past!
     I am asham'd to hear such fooleries.
     Many will talk of title to a crown:
     What right had Caesar to the empery? 12
     Might first made kings, and laws were then most sure
     When, like the Draco's, 13 they were writ in blood.
     Hence comes it that a strong-built citadel
     Commands much more than letters can import:
     Which maxim had 14 Phalaris observ'd,
     H'ad never bellow'd, in a brazen bull,
     Of great ones' envy:  o' the poor petty wights
     Let me be envied and not pitied.
     But whither am I bound?  I come not, I,
     To read a lecture here 15 in Britain,
     But to present the tragedy of a Jew,
     Who smiles to see how full his bags are cramm'd;
     Which money was not got without my means.
     I crave but this,—grace him as he deserves,
     And let him not be entertain'd the worse
     Because he favours me.
          [Exit.]




ACT I. 16

          BARABAS discovered in his counting-house, with heaps
          of gold before him.

     BARABAS. So that of thus much that return was made;
     And of the third part of the Persian ships
     There was the venture summ'd and satisfied.
     As for those Samnites, 17 and the men of Uz,
     That bought my Spanish oils and wines of Greece,
     Here have I purs'd their paltry silverlings. 18
     Fie, what a trouble 'tis to count this trash!
     Well fare the Arabians, who so richly pay
     The things they traffic for with wedge of gold,
     Whereof a man may easily in a day
     Tell 19 that which may maintain him all his life.
     The needy groom, that never finger'd groat,
     Would make a miracle of thus much coin;
     But he whose steel-barr'd coffers are cramm'd full,
     And all his life-time hath been tired,
     Wearying his fingers' ends with telling it,
     Would in his age be loath to labour so,
     And for a pound to sweat himself to death.
     Give me the merchants of the Indian mines,
     That trade in metal of the purest mould;
     The wealthy Moor, that in the eastern rocks
     Without control can pick his riches up,
     And in his house heap pearl like pebble-stones,
     Receive them free, and sell them by the weight;
     Bags of fiery opals, sapphires, amethysts,
     Jacinths, hard topaz, grass-green emeralds,
     Beauteous rubies, sparkling diamonds,
     And seld-seen 20 costly stones of so great price,
     As one of them, indifferently rated,
     And of a carat of this quantity,
     May serve, in peril of calamity,
     To ransom great kings from captivity.
     This is the ware wherein consists my wealth;
     And thus methinks should men of judgment frame
     Their means of traffic from the vulgar trade,
     And, as their wealth increaseth, so inclose
     Infinite riches in a little room.
     But now how stands the wind?
     Into what corner peers my halcyon's bill? 21
     Ha! to the east? yes.  See how stand the vanes—
     East and by south:  why, then, I hope my ships
     I sent for Egypt and the bordering isles
     Are gotten up by Nilus' winding banks;
     Mine argosy from Alexandria,
     Loaden with spice and silks, now under sail,
     Are smoothly gliding down by Candy-shore
     To Malta, through our Mediterranean sea.—
     But who comes here?

          Enter a MERCHANT.

                         How now!

     MERCHANT. Barabas, thy ships are safe,
     Riding in Malta-road; and all the merchants
     With other merchandise are safe arriv'd,
     And have sent me to know whether yourself
     Will come and custom them. 22

     BARABAS. The ships are safe thou say'st, and richly fraught?

     MERCHANT. They are.

     BARABAS. Why, then, go bid them come ashore,
     And bring with them their bills of entry:
     I hope our credit in the custom-house
     Will serve as well as I were present there.
     Go send 'em threescore camels, thirty mules,
     And twenty waggons, to bring up the ware.
     But art thou master in a ship of mine,
     And is thy credit not enough for that?

     MERCHANT. The very custom barely comes to more
     Than many merchants of the town are worth,
     And therefore far exceeds my credit, sir.

     BARABAS. Go tell 'em the Jew of Malta sent thee, man:
     Tush, who amongst 'em knows not Barabas?

     MERCHANT. I go.

     BARABAS. So, then, there's somewhat come.—
     Sirrah, which of my ships art thou master of?

     MERCHANT. Of the Speranza, sir.

     BARABAS. And saw'st thou not
     Mine argosy at Alexandria?
     Thou couldst not come from Egypt, or by Caire,
     But at the entry there into the sea,
     Where Nilus pays his tribute to the main,
     Thou needs must sail by Alexandria.

     MERCHANT. I neither saw them, nor inquir'd of them:
     But this we heard some of our seamen say,
     They wonder'd how you durst with so much wealth
     Trust such a crazed vessel, and so far.

     BARABAS. Tush, they are wise!  I know her and her strength.
     But 23 go, go thou thy ways, discharge thy ship,
     And bid my factor bring his loading in.
          [Exit MERCHANT.]
     And yet I wonder at this argosy.

          Enter a Second MERCHANT.

     SECOND MERCHANT. Thine argosy from Alexandria,
     Know, Barabas, doth ride in Malta-road,
     Laden with riches, and exceeding store
     Of Persian silks, of gold, and orient pearl.

     BARABAS. How chance you came not with those other ships
     That sail'd by Egypt?

     SECOND MERCHANT. Sir, we saw 'em not.

     BARABAS. Belike they coasted round by Candy-shore
     About their oils or other businesses.
     But 'twas ill done of you to come so far
     Without the aid or conduct of their ships.

     SECOND MERCHANT. Sir, we were wafted by a Spanish fleet,
     That never left us till within a league,
     That had the galleys of the Turk in chase.

     BARABAS. O, they were going up to Sicily.
     Well, go,
     And bid the merchants and my men despatch,
     And come ashore, and see the fraught 24 discharg'd.

     SECOND MERCHANT. I go.
          [Exit.]

     BARABAS. Thus trolls our fortune in by land and sea,
     And thus are we on every side enrich'd:
     These are the blessings promis'd to the Jews,
     And herein was old Abraham's happiness:
     What more may heaven do for earthly man
     Than thus to pour out plenty in their laps,
     Ripping the bowels of the earth for them,
     Making the sea[s] their servants, and the winds
     To drive their substance with successful blasts?
     Who hateth me but for my happiness?
     Or who is honour'd now but for his wealth?
     Rather had I, a Jew, be hated thus,
     Than pitied in a Christian poverty;
     For I can see no fruits in all their faith,
     But malice, falsehood, and excessive pride,
     Which methinks fits not their profession.
     Haply some hapless man hath conscience,
     And for his conscience lives in beggary.
     They say we are a scatter'd nation:
     I cannot tell; but we have scambled 25 up
     More wealth by far than those that brag of faith:
     There's Kirriah Jairim, the great Jew of Greece,
     Obed in Bairseth, Nones in Portugal,
     Myself in Malta, some in Italy,
     Many in France, and wealthy every one;
     Ay, wealthier far than any Christian.
     I must confess we come not to be kings:
     That's not our fault:  alas, our number's few!
     And crowns come either by succession,
     Or urg'd by force; and nothing violent,
     Oft have I heard tell, can be permanent.
     Give us a peaceful rule; make Christians kings,
     That thirst so much for principality.
     I have no charge, nor many children,
     But one sole daughter, whom I hold as dear
     As Agamemnon did his Iphigen;
     And all I have is hers.—But who comes here?

          Enter three JEWS. 26

     FIRST JEW. Tush, tell not me; 'twas done of policy.

     SECOND JEW. Come, therefore, let us go to Barabas;
     For he can counsel best in these affairs:
     And here he comes.

     BARABAS. Why, how now, countrymen!
     Why flock you thus to me in multitudes?
     What accident's betided to the Jews?

     FIRST JEW. A fleet of warlike galleys, Barabas,
     Are come from Turkey, and lie in our road:
     And they this day sit in the council-house
     To entertain them and their embassy.

     BARABAS. Why, let 'em come, so they come not to war;
     Or let 'em war, so we be conquerors.—
     Nay, let 'em combat, conquer, and kill all,
     So they spare me, my daughter, and my wealth.
          [Aside.]

     FIRST JEW. Were it for confirmation of a league,
     They would not come in warlike manner thus.

     SECOND JEW. I fear their coming will afflict us all.

     BARABAS. Fond 27 men, what dream you of their multitudes?
     What need they treat of peace that are in league?
     The Turks and those of Malta are in league:
     Tut, tut, there is some other matter in't.

     FIRST JEW. Why, Barabas, they come for peace or war.

     BARABAS. Haply for neither, but to pass along,
     Towards Venice, by the Adriatic sea,
     With whom they have attempted many times,
     But never could effect their stratagem.

     THIRD JEW. And very wisely said; it may be so.

     SECOND JEW. But there's a meeting in the senate-house,
     And all the Jews in Malta must be there.

     BARABAS. Hum,—all the Jews in Malta must be there!
     Ay, like enough:  why, then, let every man
     Provide him, and be there for fashion-sake.
     If any thing shall there concern our state,
     Assure yourselves I'll look—unto myself.
          [Aside.] 28

     FIRST JEW. I know you will.—Well, brethren, let us go.

     SECOND JEW. Let's take our leaves.—Farewell, good Barabas.

     BARABAS. 29 Farewell, Zaareth; farewell, Temainte.
          [Exeunt JEWS.]
     And, Barabas, now search this secret out;
     Summon thy senses, call thy wits together:
     These silly men mistake the matter clean.
     Long to the Turk did Malta contribute;
     Which tribute all in policy, I fear,
     The Turk has 30 let increase to such a sum
     As all the wealth of Malta cannot pay;
     And now by that advantage thinks, belike,
     To seize upon the town; ay, that he seeks.
     Howe'er the world go, I'll make sure for one,
     And seek in time to intercept the worst,
     Warily guarding that which I ha' got:
     Ego mihimet sum semper proximus: 31
     Why, let 'em enter, let 'em take the town.
          [Exit.] 32

          Enter FERNEZE governor of Malta, KNIGHTS, and OFFICERS;
          met by CALYMATH, and BASSOES of the TURK.

     FERNEZE. Now, bassoes, 33 what demand you at our hands?

     FIRST BASSO. Know, knights of Malta, that we came from Rhodes,
     ]From Cyprus, Candy, and those other isles
     That lie betwixt the Mediterranean seas.

     FERNEZE. What's Cyprus, Candy, and those other isles
     To us or Malta? what at our hands demand ye?

     CALYMATH. The ten years' tribute that remains unpaid.

     FERNEZE. Alas, my lord, the sum is over-great!
     I hope your highness will consider us.

     CALYMATH. I wish, grave governor, 34 'twere in my power
     To favour you; but 'tis my father's cause,
     Wherein I may not, nay, I dare not dally.

     FERNEZE. Then give us leave, great Selim Calymath.

     CALYMATH. Stand all aside, 35 and let the knights determine;
     And send to keep our galleys under sail,
     For happily 36 we shall not tarry here.—
     Now, governor, how are you resolv'd?

     FERNEZE. Thus; since your hard conditions are such
     That you will needs have ten years' tribute past,
     We may have time to make collection
     Amongst the inhabitants of Malta for't.

     FIRST BASSO. That's more than is in our commission.

     CALYMATH. What, Callapine! a little courtesy:
     Let's know their time; perhaps it is not long;
     And 'tis more kingly to obtain by peace
     Than to enforce conditions by constraint.—
     What respite ask you, governor?

     FERNEZE. But a month.

     CALYMATH. We grant a month; but see you keep your promise.
     Now launch our galleys back again to sea,
     Where we'll attend the respite you have ta'en,
     And for the money send our messenger.
     Farewell, great governor, and brave knights of Malta.

     FERNEZE. And all good fortune wait on Calymath!
          [Exeunt CALYMATH and BASSOES.]
     Go one and call those Jews of Malta hither:
     Were they not summon'd to appear to-day?

     FIRST OFFICER. They were, my lord; and here they come.

          Enter BARABAS and three JEWS.

     FIRST KNIGHT. Have you determin'd what to say to them?

     FERNEZE. Yes; give me leave:—and, Hebrews, now come near.
     ]From the Emperor of Turkey is arriv'd
     Great Selim Calymath, his highness' son,
     To levy of us ten years' tribute past:
     Now, then, here know that it concerneth us.

     BARABAS. Then, good my lord, to keep your quiet still,
     Your lordship shall do well to let them have it.

     FERNEZE. Soft, Barabas! there's more 'longs to't than so.
     To what this ten years' tribute will amount,
     That we have cast, but cannot compass it
     By reason of the wars, that robb'd our store;
     And therefore are we to request your aid.

     BARABAS. Alas, my lord, we are no soldiers!
     And what's our aid against so great a prince?

     FIRST KNIGHT. Tut, Jew, we know thou art no soldier:
     Thou art a merchant and a money'd man,
     And 'tis thy money, Barabas, we seek.

     BARABAS. How, my lord! my money!

     FERNEZE. Thine and the rest;
     For, to be short, amongst you't must be had.

     FIRST JEW. Alas, my lord, the most of us are poor!

     FERNEZE. Then let the rich increase your portions.

     BARABAS. Are strangers with your tribute to be tax'd?

     SECOND KNIGHT. Have strangers leave with us to get their wealth?
     Then let them with us contribute.

     BARABAS. How! equally?

     FERNEZE. No, Jew, like infidels;
     For through our sufferance of your hateful lives,
     Who stand accursed in the sight of heaven,
     These taxes and afflictions are befall'n,
     And therefore thus we are determined.—
     Read there the articles of our decrees.

     OFFICER. 37 [reads] FIRST, THE TRIBUTE-MONEY OF THE TURKS
     SHALL ALL BE LEVIED AMONGST THE JEWS, AND EACH OF THEM TO PAY
     ONE HALF OF HIS ESTATE.

     BARABAS. How! half his estate!—I hope you mean not mine.
          [Aside.]

     FERNEZE. Read on.

     OFFICER. [reads] SECONDLY, HE THAT DENIES 38 TO PAY, SHALL
     STRAIGHT-BECOME A CHRISTIAN.

     BARABAS. How! a Christian!—Hum,—what's here to do?
          [Aside.]

     OFFICER. [reads] LASTLY, HE THAT DENIES THIS, SHALL ABSOLUTELY
     LOSE ALL HE HAS.

     THREE JEWS. O my lord, we will give half!

     BARABAS. O earth-mettled villains, and no Hebrews born!
     And will you basely thus submit yourselves
     To leave your goods to their arbitrement?

     FERNEZE. Why, Barabas, wilt thou be christened?

     BARABAS. No, governor, I will be no convertite. 39

     FERNEZE. Then pay thy half.

     BARABAS. Why, know you what you did by this device?
     Half of my substance is a city's wealth.
     Governor, it was not got so easily;
     Nor will I part so slightly therewithal.

     FERNEZE. Sir, half is the penalty of our decree;
     Either pay that, or we will seize on all.

     BARABAS. Corpo di Dio! stay:  you shall have half;
     Let me be us'd but as my brethren are.

     FERNEZE. No, Jew, thou hast denied the articles,
     And now it cannot be recall'd.
          [Exeunt OFFICERS, on a sign from FERNEZE]

     BARABAS. Will you, then, steal my goods?
     Is theft the ground of your religion?

     FERNEZE. No, Jew; we take particularly thine,
     To save the ruin of a multitude:
     And better one want for a common good,
     Than many perish for a private man:
     Yet, Barabas, we will not banish thee,
     But here in Malta, where thou gott'st thy wealth,
     Live still; and, if thou canst, get more.

     BARABAS. Christians, what or how can I multiply?
     Of naught is nothing made.

     FIRST KNIGHT. From naught at first thou cam'st to little wealth,
     ]From little unto more, from more to most:
     If your first curse fall heavy on thy head,
     And make thee poor and scorn'd of all the world,
     'Tis not our fault, but thy inherent sin.

     BARABAS. What, bring you Scripture to confirm your wrongs?
     Preach me not out of my possessions.
     Some Jews are wicked, as all Christians are:
     But say the tribe that I descended of
     Were all in general cast away for sin,
     Shall I be tried by their transgression?
     The man that dealeth righteously shall live;
     And which of you can charge me otherwise?

     FERNEZE. Out, wretched Barabas!
     Sham'st thou not thus to justify thyself,
     As if we knew not thy profession?
     If thou rely upon thy righteousness,
     Be patient, and thy riches will increase.
     Excess of wealth is cause of covetousness;
     And covetousness, O, 'tis a monstrous sin!

     BARABAS. Ay, but theft is worse:  tush! take not from me, then,
     For that is theft; and, if you rob me thus,
     I must be forc'd to steal, and compass more.

     FIRST KNIGHT. Grave governor, list not to his exclaims:
     Convert his mansion to a nunnery;
     His house will harbour many holy nuns.

     FERNEZE. It shall be so.

          Re-enter OFFICERS.

                         Now, officers, have you done?

     FIRST OFFICER. Ay, my lord, we have seiz'd upon the goods
     And wares of Barabas, which, being valu'd,
     Amount to more than all the wealth in Malta:
     And of the other we have seized half.

     FERNEZE. Then we'll take 40 order for the residue.

     BARABAS. Well, then, my lord, say, are you satisfied?
     You have my goods, my money, and my wealth,
     My ships, my store, and all that I enjoy'd;
     And, having all, you can request no more,
     Unless your unrelenting flinty hearts
     Suppress all pity in your stony breasts,
     And now shall move you to bereave my life.

     FERNEZE. No, Barabas; to stain our hands with blood
     Is far from us and our profession.

     BARABAS.  Why, I esteem the injury far less,
     To take the lives of miserable men
     Than be the causers of their misery.
     You have my wealth, the labour of my life,
     The comfort of mine age, my children's hope;
     And therefore ne'er distinguish of the wrong.

     FERNEZE. Content thee, Barabas; thou hast naught but right.

     BARABAS. Your extreme right does me exceeding wrong:
     But take it to you, i'the devil's name!

     FERNEZE. Come, let us in, and gather of these goods
     The money for this tribute of the Turk.

     FIRST KNIGHT. 'Tis necessary that be look'd unto;
     For, if we break our day, we break the league,
     And that will prove but simple policy.
          [Exeunt all except BARABAS and the three JEWS.]

     BARABAS. Ay, policy! that's their profession,
     And not simplicity, as they suggest.—
     The plagues of Egypt, and the curse of heaven,
     Earth's barrenness, and all men's hatred,
     Inflict upon them, thou great Primus Motor!
     And here upon my knees, striking the earth,
     I ban their souls to everlasting pains,
     And extreme tortures of the fiery deep,
     That thus have dealt with me in my distress!

     FIRST JEW. O, yet be patient, gentle Barabas!

     BARABAS. O silly brethren, born to see this day,
     Why stand you thus unmov'd with my laments?
     Why weep you not to think upon my wrongs?
     Why pine not I, and die in this distress?

     FIRST JEW. Why, Barabas, as hardly can we brook
     The cruel handling of ourselves in this:
     Thou seest they have taken half our goods.

     BARABAS. Why did you yield to their extortion?
     You were a multitude, and I but one;
     And of me only have they taken all.

     FIRST JEW. Yet, brother Barabas, remember Job.

     BARABAS. What tell you me of Job? I wot his wealth
     Was written thus; he had seven thousand sheep,
     Three thousand camels, and two hundred yoke
     Of labouring oxen, and five hundred
     She-asses:  but for every one of those,
     Had they been valu'd at indifferent rate,
     I had at home, and in mine argosy,
     And other ships that came from Egypt last,
     As much as would have bought his beasts and him,
     And yet have kept enough to live upon;
     So that not he, but I, may curse the day,
     Thy fatal birth-day, forlorn Barabas;
     And henceforth wish for an eternal night,
     That clouds of darkness may inclose my flesh,
     And hide these extreme sorrows from mine eyes;
     For only I have toil'd to inherit here
     The months of vanity, and loss of time,
     And painful nights, have been appointed me.

     SECOND JEW. Good Barabas, be patient.

     BARABAS. Ay, I pray, leave me in my patience.  You, that
     Were ne'er possess'd of wealth, are pleas'd with want;
     But give him liberty at least to mourn,
     That in a field, amidst his enemies,
     Doth see his soldiers slain, himself disarm'd,
     And knows no means of his recovery:
     Ay, let me sorrow for this sudden chance;
     'Tis in the trouble of my spirit I speak:
     Great injuries are not so soon forgot.

     FIRST JEW. Come, let us leave him; in his ireful mood
     Our words will but increase his ecstasy. 41

     SECOND JEW. On, then:  but, trust me, 'tis a misery
     To see a man in such affliction.—
     Farewell, Barabas.

     BARABAS. Ay, fare you well.
          [Exeunt three JEWS.] 42
     See the simplicity of these base slaves,
     Who, for the villains have no wit themselves,
     Think me to be a senseless lump of clay,
     That will with every water wash to dirt!
     No, Barabas is born to better chance,
     And fram'd of finer mould than common men,
     That measure naught but by the present time.
     A reaching thought will search his deepest wits,
     And cast with cunning for the time to come;
     For evils are apt to happen every day.

          Enter ABIGAIL.

     But whither wends my beauteous Abigail?
     O, what has made my lovely daughter sad?
     What, woman! moan not for a little loss;
     Thy father has enough in store for thee.

     ABIGAIL. Nor for myself, but aged Barabas,
     Father, for thee lamenteth Abigail:
     But I will learn to leave these fruitless tears;
     And, urg'd thereto with my afflictions,
     With fierce exclaims run to the senate-house,
     And in the senate reprehend them all,
     And rent their hearts with tearing of my hair,
     Till they reduce 43 the wrongs done to my father.

     BARABAS. No, Abigail; things past recovery
     Are hardly cur'd with exclamations:
     Be silent, daughter; sufferance breeds ease,
     And time may yield us an occasion,
     Which on the sudden cannot serve the turn.
     Besides, my girl, think me not all so fond 44
     As negligently to forgo so much
     Without provision for thyself and me:
     Ten thousand portagues, 45 besides great pearls,
     Rich costly jewels, and stones infinite,
     Fearing the worst of this before it fell,
     I closely hid.

     ABIGAIL. Where, father?

     BARABAS. In my house, my girl.

     ABIGAIL. Then shall they ne'er be seen of Barabas;
     For they have seiz'd upon thy house and wares.

     BARABAS. But they will give me leave once more, I trow,
     To go into my house.

     ABIGAIL. That may they not;
     For there I left the governor placing nuns,
     Displacing me; and of thy house they mean
     To make a nunnery, where none but their own sect 46
     Must enter in; men generally barr'd.

     BARABAS. My gold, my gold, and all my wealth is gone!—
     You partial heavens, have I deserv'd this plague?
     What, will you thus oppose me, luckless stars,
     To make me desperate in my poverty?
     And, knowing me impatient in distress,
     Think me so mad as I will hang myself,
     That I may vanish o'er the earth in air,
     And leave no memory that e'er I was?
     No, I will live; nor loathe I this my life:
     And, since you leave me in the ocean thus
     To sink or swim, and put me to my shifts,
     I'll rouse my senses, and awake myself.—
     Daughter, I have it:  thou perceiv'st the plight
     Wherein these Christians have oppressed me:
     Be rul'd by me, for in extremity
     We ought to make bar of no policy.

     ABIGAIL. Father, whate'er it be, to injure them
     That have so manifestly wronged us,
     What will not Abigail attempt?

     BARABAS. Why, so.
     Then thus:  thou told'st me they have turn'd my house
     Into a nunnery, and some nuns are there?

     ABIGAIL. I did.

     BARABAS. Then, Abigail, there must my girl
     Entreat the abbess to be entertain'd.

     ABIGAIL. How! as a nun?

     BARABAS. Ay, daughter; for religion
     Hides many mischiefs from suspicion.

     ABIGAIL. Ay, but, father, they will suspect me there.

     BARABAS. Let 'em suspect; but be thou so precise
     As they may think it done of holiness:
     Entreat 'em fair, and give them friendly speech,
     And seem to them as if thy sins were great,
     Till thou hast gotten to be entertain'd.

     ABIGAIL. Thus, father, shall I much dissemble.

     BARABAS. Tush!
     As good dissemble that thou never mean'st,
     As first mean truth and then dissemble it:
     A counterfeit profession is better
     Than unseen hypocrisy.

     ABIGAIL. Well, father, say I be entertain'd,
     What then shall follow?

     BARABAS. This shall follow then.
     There have I hid, close underneath the plank
     That runs along the upper-chamber floor,
     The gold and jewels which I kept for thee:—
     But here they come:  be cunning, Abigail.

     ABIGAIL. Then, father, go with me.

     BARABAS. No, Abigail, in this
     It is not necessary I be seen;
     For I will seem offended with thee for't:
     Be close, my girl, for this must fetch my gold.
          [They retire.]

          Enter FRIAR JACOMO, 47 FRIAR BARNARDINE, ABBESS, and a NUN.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Sisters,
     We now are almost at the new-made nunnery.

     ABBESS. 48 The better; for we love not to be seen:
     'Tis thirty winters long since some of us
     Did stray so far amongst the multitude.

     FRIAR JACOMO. But, madam, this house
     And waters of this new-made nunnery
     Will much delight you.

     ABBESS. It may be so.—But who comes here?

          [ABIGAIL comes forward.]

     ABIGAIL. Grave abbess, and you happy virgins' guide,
     Pity the state of a distressed maid!

     ABBESS. What art thou, daughter?

     ABIGAIL. The hopeless daughter of a hapless Jew,
     The Jew of Malta, wretched Barabas,
     Sometimes 49 the owner of a goodly house,
     Which they have now turn'd to a nunnery.

     ABBESS. Well, daughter, say, what is thy suit with us?

     ABIGAIL. Fearing the afflictions which my father feels
     Proceed from sin or want of faith in us,
     I'd pass away my life in penitence,
     And be a novice in your nunnery,
     To make atonement for my labouring soul.

     FRIAR JACOMO. No doubt, brother, but this proceedeth of
     the spirit.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE.
     Ay, and of a moving spirit too, brother:  but come,
     Let us entreat she may be entertain'd.

     ABBESS. Well, daughter, we admit you for a nun.

     ABIGAIL. First let me as a novice learn to frame
     My solitary life to your strait laws,
     And let me lodge where I was wont to lie:
     I do not doubt, by your divine precepts
     And mine own industry, but to profit much.

     BARABAS. As much, I hope, as all I hid is worth.
          [Aside.]

     ABBESS. Come, daughter, follow us.

     BARABAS. [coming forward] Why, how now, Abigail!
     What mak'st thou 'mongst these hateful Christians?

     FRIAR JACOMO. Hinder her not, thou man of little faith,
     For she has mortified herself.

     BARABAS. How! mortified!

     FRIAR JACOMO. And is admitted to the sisterhood.

     BARABAS. Child of perdition, and thy father's shame!
     What wilt thou do among these hateful fiends?
     I charge thee on my blessing that thou leave
     These devils and their damned heresy!

     ABIGAIL. Father, forgive me— 50

     BARABAS. Nay, back, Abigail,
     And think upon the jewels and the gold;
     The board is marked thus that covers it.—
          [Aside to ABIGAIL in a whisper.]
     Away, accursed, from thy father's sight!

     FRIAR JACOMO. Barabas, although thou art in misbelief,
     And wilt not see thine own afflictions,
     Yet let thy daughter be no longer blind.

     BARABAS. Blind friar, I reck not thy persuasions,—
     The board is marked thus 51 that covers it—
          [Aside to ABIGAIL in a whisper.]
     For I had rather die than see her thus.—
     Wilt thou forsake me too in my distress,
     Seduced daughter?—Go, forget not.— 52
          [Aside to her in a whisper.]
     Becomes it Jews to be so credulous?—
     To-morrow early I'll be at the door.—
          [Aside to her in a whisper.]
     No, come not at me; if thou wilt be damn'd,
     Forget me, see me not; and so, be gone!—
     Farewell; remember to-morrow morning.—
          [Aside to her in a whisper.]
     Out, out, thou wretch!
          [Exit, on one side, BARABAS.  Exeunt, on the other side,
          FRIARS, ABBESS, NUN, and ABIGAIL:  and, as they are going
          out,]

          Enter MATHIAS.

     MATHIAS. Who's this? fair Abigail, the rich Jew's daughter,
     Become a nun! her father's sudden fall
     Has humbled her, and brought her down to this:
     Tut, she were fitter for a tale of love,
     Than to be tired out with orisons;
     And better would she far become a bed,
     Embraced in a friendly lover's arms,
     Than rise at midnight to a solemn mass.

          Enter LODOWICK.

     LODOWICK. Why, how now, Don Mathias! in a dump?

     MATHIAS. Believe me, noble Lodowick, I have seen
     The strangest sight, in my opinion,
     That ever I beheld.

     LODOWICK. What was't, I prithee?

     MATHIAS. A fair young maid, scarce fourteen years of age,
     The sweetest flower in Cytherea's field,
     Cropt from the pleasures of the fruitful earth,
     And strangely metamorphos'd [to a] nun.

     LODOWICK. But say, what was she?

     MATHIAS. Why, the rich Jew's daughter.

     LODOWICK. What, Barabas, whose goods were lately seiz'd?
     Is she so fair?

     MATHIAS. And matchless beautiful,
     As, had you seen her, 'twould have mov'd your heart,
     Though countermin'd with walls of brass, to love,
     Or, at the least, to pity.

     LODOWICK. An if she be so fair as you report,
     'Twere time well spent to go and visit her:
     How say you? shall we?

     MATHIAS. I must and will, sir; there's no remedy.

     LODOWICK. And so will I too, or it shall go hard.
     Farewell, Mathias.

     MATHIAS. Farewell, Lodowick.
          [Exeunt severally.]




ACT II.

          Enter BARABAS, with a light. 53

     BARABAS. Thus, like the sad-presaging raven, that tolls
     The sick man's passport in her hollow beak, 54
     And in the shadow of the silent night
     Doth shake contagion from her sable wings,
     Vex'd and tormented runs poor Barabas
     With fatal curses towards these Christians.
     The incertain pleasures of swift-footed time
     Have ta'en their flight, and left me in despair;
     And of my former riches rests no more
     But bare remembrance; like a soldier's scar,
     That has no further comfort for his maim.—
     O Thou, that with a fiery pillar ledd'st
     The sons of Israel through the dismal shades,
     Light Abraham's offspring; and direct the hand
     Of Abigail this night! or let the day
     Turn to eternal darkness after this!—
     No sleep can fasten on my watchful eyes,
     Nor quiet enter my distemper'd thoughts,
     Till I have answer of my Abigail.

          Enter ABIGAIL above.

     ABIGAIL. Now have I happily espied a time
     To search the plank my father did appoint;
     And here, behold, unseen, where I have found
     The gold, the pearls, and jewels, which he hid.

     BARABAS. Now I remember those old women's words,
     Who in my wealth would tell me winter's tales,
     And speak of spirits and ghosts that glide by night
     About the place where treasure hath been hid:
     And now methinks that I am one of those;
     For, whilst I live, here lives my soul's sole hope,
     And, when I die, here shall my spirit walk.

     ABIGAIL. Now that my father's fortune were so good
     As but to be about this happy place!
     'Tis not so happy:  yet, when we parted last,
     He said he would attend me in the morn.
     Then, gentle Sleep, where'er his body rests,
     Give charge to Morpheus that he may dream
     A golden dream, and of 55 the sudden wake, 56
     Come and receive the treasure I have found.

     BARABAS. Bueno para todos mi ganado no era: 57
     As good go on, as sit so sadly thus.—
     But stay:  what star shines yonder in the east? 58
     The loadstar of my life, if Abigail.—
     Who's there?

     ABIGAIL. Who's that?

     BARABAS. Peace, Abigail! 'tis I.

     ABIGAIL. Then, father, here receive thy happiness.

     BARABAS. Hast thou't?

     ABIGAIL. Here.[throws down bags]  Hast thou't?
     There's more, and more, and more.

     BARABAS. O my girl,
     My gold, my fortune, my felicity,
     Strength to my soul, death to mine enemy;
     Welcome the first beginner of my bliss!
     O Abigail, Abigail, that I had thee here too!
     Then my desires were fully satisfied:
     But I will practice thy enlargement thence:
     O girl! O gold! O beauty! O my bliss!
          [Hugs the bags.]

     ABIGAIL. Father, it draweth towards midnight now,
     And 'bout this time the nuns begin to wake;
     To shun suspicion, therefore, let us part.

     BARABAS. Farewell, my joy, and by my fingers take
     A kiss from him that sends it from his soul.
          [Exit ABIGAIL above.]
     Now, Phoebus, ope the eye-lids of the day.
     And, for the raven, wake the morning lark,
     That I may hover with her in the air,
     Singing o'er these, as she does o'er her young.
     Hermoso placer de los dineros. 59
          [Exit.]

          Enter FERNEZE, 60 MARTIN DEL BOSCO, KNIGHTS, and OFFICERS.

     FERNEZE. Now, captain, tell us whither thou art bound?
     Whence is thy ship that anchors in our road?
     And why thou cam'st ashore without our leave?

     MARTIN DEL BOSCO. Governor of Malta, hither am I bound;
     My ship, the Flying Dragon, is of Spain,
     And so am I; Del Bosco is my name,
     Vice-admiral unto the Catholic King.

     FIRST KNIGHT. 'Tis true, my lord; therefore entreat 61 him well.

     MARTIN DEL BOSCO.
     Our fraught is Grecians, Turks, and Afric Moors;
     For late upon the coast of Corsica,
     Because we vail'd not 62 to the Turkish 63 fleet,
     Their creeping galleys had us in the chase:
     But suddenly the wind began to rise,
     And then we luff'd and tack'd, 64 and fought at ease:
     Some have we fir'd, and many have we sunk;
     But one amongst the rest became our prize:
     The captain's slain; the rest remain our slaves,
     Of whom we would make sale in Malta here.

     FERNEZE. Martin del Bosco, I have heard of thee:
     Welcome to Malta, and to all of us!
     But to admit a sale of these thy Turks,
     We may not, nay, we dare not give consent,
     By reason of a tributary league.

     FIRST KNIGHT. Del Bosco, as thou lov'st and honour'st us,
     Persuade our governor against the Turk:
     This truce we have is but in hope of gold,
     And with that sum he craves might we wage war.

     MARTIN DEL BOSCO. Will knights of Malta be in league with Turks,
     And buy it basely too for sums of gold?
     My lord, remember that, to Europe's shame,
     The Christian isle of Rhodes, from whence you came,
     Was lately lost, and you were stated 65 here
     To be at deadly enmity with Turks.

     FERNEZE. Captain, we know it; but our force is small.

     MARTIN DEL BOSCO. What is the sum that Calymath requires?

     FERNEZE. A hundred thousand crowns.

     MARTIN DEL BOSCO. My lord and king hath title to this isle,
     And he means quickly to expel you hence;
     Therefore be rul'd by me, and keep the gold:
     I'll write unto his majesty for aid,
     And not depart until I see you free.

     FERNEZE. On this condition shall thy Turks be sold.—
     Go, officers, and set them straight in show.—
          [Exeunt OFFICERS.]
     Bosco, thou shalt be Malta's general;
     We and our warlike knights will follow thee
     Against these barbarous misbelieving Turks.

     MARTIN DEL BOSCO. So shall you imitate those you succeed;
     For, when their hideous force environ'd Rhodes,
     Small though the number was that kept the town,
     They fought it out, and not a man surviv'd
     To bring the hapless news to Christendom.

     FERNEZE. So will we fight it out:  come, let's away.
     Proud daring Calymath, instead of gold,
     We'll send thee bullets wrapt in smoke and fire:
     Claim tribute where thou wilt, we are resolv'd,—
     Honour is bought with blood, and not with gold.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter OFFICERS, 66 with ITHAMORE and other SLAVES.

     FIRST OFFICER. This is the market-place; here let 'em stand:
     Fear not their sale, for they'll be quickly bought.

     SECOND OFFICER. Every one's price is written on his back,
     And so much must they yield, or not be sold.

     FIRST OFFICER.
     Here comes the Jew:  had not his goods been seiz'd,
     He'd give us present money for them all.

          Enter BARABAS.

     BARABAS. In spite of these swine-eating Christians,
     (Unchosen nation, never circumcis'd,
     Poor villains, such as were 67 ne'er thought upon
     Till Titus and Vespasian conquer'd us,)
     Am I become as wealthy as I was.
     They hop'd my daughter would ha' been a nun;
     But she's at home, and I have bought a house
     As great and fair as is the governor's:
     And there, in spite of Malta, will I dwell,
     Having Ferneze's hand; whose heart I'll have,
     Ay, and his son's too, or it shall go hard.
     I am not of the tribe of Levi, I,
     That can so soon forget an injury.
     We Jews can fawn like spaniels when we please;
     And when we grin we bite; yet are our looks
     As innocent and harmless as a lamb's.
     I learn'd in Florence how to kiss my hand,
     Heave up my shoulders when they call me dog,
     And duck as low as any bare-foot friar;
     Hoping to see them starve upon a stall,
     Or else be gather'd for in our synagogue,
     That, when the offering-basin comes to me,
     Even for charity I may spit into't.—
     Here comes Don Lodowick, the governor's son,
     One that I love for his good father's sake.

          Enter LODOWICK.

     LODOWICK. I hear the wealthy Jew walked this way:
     I'll seek him out, and so insinuate,
     That I may have a sight of Abigail,
     For Don Mathias tells me she is fair.

     BARABAS. Now will I shew myself to have more of the serpent than
     the dove; that is, more knave than fool.
          [Aside.]

     LODOWICK. Yond' walks the Jew:  now for fair Abigail.

     BARABAS. Ay, ay, no doubt but she's at your command.
          [Aside.]

     LODOWICK. Barabas, thou know'st I am the governor's son.

     BARABAS.
     I would you were his father too, sir! that's all the harm
     I wish you.—The slave looks like a hog's cheek new-singed.
          [Aside.]

     LODOWICK. Whither walk'st thou, Barabas?

     BARABAS. No further:  'tis a custom held with us,
     That when we speak with Gentiles like to you,
     We turn into 68 the air to purge ourselves;
     For unto us the promise doth belong.

     LODOWICK. Well, Barabas, canst help me to a diamond?

     BARABAS. O, sir, your father had my diamonds:
     Yet I have one left that will serve your turn.—
     I mean my daughter; but, ere he shall have her,
     I'll sacrifice her on a pile of wood:
     I ha' the poison of the city 69 for him,
     And the white leprosy.
          [Aside.]

     LODOWICK. What sparkle does it give without a foil?

     BARABAS. The diamond that I talk of ne'er was foil'd:—
     But, when he touches it, it will be foil'd.— 70
          [Aside.]
     Lord Lodowick, it sparkles bright and fair.

     LODOWICK. Is it square or pointed? pray, let me know.

     BARABAS. Pointed it is, good sir,—but not for you.
          [Aside.]

     LODOWICK. I like it much the better.

     BARABAS. So do I too.

     LODOWICK. How shews it by night?

     BARABAS. Outshines Cynthia's rays:—
     You'll like it better far o' nights than days.
          [Aside.]

     LODOWICK. And what's the price?

     BARABAS. Your life, an if you have it [Aside].—O my lord,
     We will not jar about the price:  come to my house,
     And I will give't your honour—with a vengeance.
          [Aside.]

     LODOWICK. No, Barabas, I will deserve it first.

     BARABAS. Good sir,
     Your father has deserv'd it at my hands,
     Who, of mere charity and Christian ruth,
     To bring me to religious purity,
     And, as it were, in catechising sort,
     To make me mindful of my mortal sins,
     Against my will, and whether I would or no,
     Seiz'd all I had, and thrust me out o' doors,
     And made my house a place for nuns most chaste.

     LODOWICK. No doubt your soul shall reap the fruit of it.

     BARABAS. Ay, but, my lord, the harvest is far off:
     And yet I know the prayers of those nuns
     And holy friars, having money for their pains,
     Are wondrous;—and indeed do no man good;—
          [Aside.]
     And, seeing they are not idle, but still doing,
     'Tis likely they in time may reap some fruit,
     I mean, in fullness of perfection.

     LODOWICK. Good Barabas, glance not at our holy nuns.

     BARABAS. No, but I do it through a burning zeal,—
     Hoping ere long to set the house a-fire;
     For, though they do a while increase and multiply,
     I'll have a saying to that nunnery.— 71
          [Aside.]
     As for the diamond, sir, I told you of,
     Come home, and there's no price shall make us part,
     Even for your honourable father's sake,—
     It shall go hard but I will see your death.—
          [Aside.]
     But now I must be gone to buy a slave.

     LODOWICK. And, Barabas, I'll bear thee company.

     BARABAS. Come, then; here's the market-place.—
     What's the price of this slave? two hundred crowns! do the Turks
     weigh so much?

     FIRST OFFICER. Sir, that's his price.

     BARABAS. What, can he steal, that you demand so much?
     Belike he has some new trick for a purse;
     An if he has, he is worth three hundred plates, 72
     So that, being bought, the town-seal might be got
     To keep him for his life-time from the gallows:
     The sessions-day is critical to thieves,
     And few or none scape but by being purg'd.

     LODOWICK. Rat'st thou this Moor but at two hundred plates?

     FIRST OFFICER. No more, my lord.

     BARABAS. Why should this Turk be dearer than that Moor?

     FIRST OFFICER. Because he is young, and has more qualities.

     BARABAS. What, hast the philosopher's stone? an thou hast, break
     my head with it, I'll forgive thee.

     SLAVE. 73 No, sir; I can cut and shave.

     BARABAS. Let me see, sirrah; are you not an old shaver?

     SLAVE. Alas, sir, I am a very youth!

     BARABAS. A youth! I'll buy you, and marry you to Lady Vanity, 74
     if you do well.

     SLAVE. I will serve you, sir.

     BARABAS. Some wicked trick or other:  it may be, under colour
     of shaving, thou'lt cut my throat for my goods.  Tell me,
     hast thou thy health well?

     SLAVE. Ay, passing well.

     BARABAS. So much the worse:  I must have one that's sickly, an't
     be but for sparing victuals:  'tis not a stone of beef a-day
     will maintain you in these chops.—Let me see one that's
     somewhat leaner.

     FIRST OFFICER. Here's a leaner; how like you him?

     BARABAS. Where wast thou born?

     ITHAMORE. In Thrace; brought up in Arabia.

     BARABAS. So much the better; thou art for my turn.
     An hundred crowns?  I'll have him; there's the coin.
          [Gives money.]

     FIRST OFFICER. Then mark him, sir, and take him hence.

     BARABAS. Ay, mark him, you were best; for this is he
     That by my help shall do much villany.—
          [Aside.]
     My lord, farewell.—Come, sirrah; you are mine.—
     As for the diamond, it shall be yours:
     I pray, sir, be no stranger at my house;
     All that I have shall be at your command.

          Enter MATHIAS and KATHARINE. 75

     MATHIAS. What make the Jew and Lodowick so private?
     I fear me 'tis about fair Abigail.
          [Aside.]

     BARABAS. [to LODOWICK.] Yonder comes Don Mathias; let us stay: 76
     He loves my daughter, and she holds him dear;
     But I have sworn to frustrate both their hopes,
     And be reveng'd upon the—governor.
          [Aside.]
          [Exit LODOWICK.]

     KATHARINE. This Moor is comeliest, is he not? speak, son.

     MATHIAS. No, this is the better, mother, view this well.

     BARABAS. Seem not to know me here before your mother,
     Lest she mistrust the match that is in hand:
     When you have brought her home, come to my house;
     Think of me as thy father:  son, farewell.

     MATHIAS. But wherefore talk'd Don Lodowick with you?

     BARABAS. Tush, man! we talk'd of diamonds, not of Abigail.

     KATHARINE. Tell me, Mathias, is not that the Jew?

     BARABAS. As for the comment on the Maccabees,
     I have it, sir, and 'tis at your command.

     MATHIAS. Yes, madam, and my talk with him was 77
     About the borrowing of a book or two.

     KATHARINE. Converse not with him; he is cast off from heaven.—
     Thou hast thy crowns, fellow.—Come, let's away.

     MATHIAS. Sirrah Jew, remember the book.

     BARABAS. Marry, will I, sir.
          [Exeunt KATHARlNE and MATHIAS.]

     FIRST OFFICER. Come, I have made a reasonable market; let's away.
          [Exeunt OFFICERS with SLAVES.]

     BARABAS. Now let me know thy name, and therewithal
     Thy birth, condition, and profession.

     ITHAMORE. Faith, sir, my birth is but mean; my name's Ithamore;
     my profession what you please.

     BARABAS. Hast thou no trade? then listen to my words,
     And I will teach [thee] that shall stick by thee:
     First, be thou void of these affections,
     Compassion, love, vain hope, and heartless fear;
     Be mov'd at nothing, see thou pity none,
     But to thyself smile when the Christians moan.

     ITHAMORE. O, brave, master! 78 I worship your nose 79 for this.

     BARABAS. As for myself, I walk abroad o' nights,
     And kill sick people groaning under walls:
     Sometimes I go about and poison wells;
     And now and then, to cherish Christian thieves,
     I am content to lose some of my crowns,
     That I may, walking in my gallery,
     See 'em go pinion'd along by my door.
     Being young, I studied physic, and began
     To practice first upon the Italian;
     There I enrich'd the priests with burials,
     And always kept the sexton's arms in ure 80
     With digging graves and ringing dead men's knells:
     And, after that, was I an engineer,
     And in the wars 'twixt France and Germany,
     Under pretence of helping Charles the Fifth,
     Slew friend and enemy with my stratagems:
     Then, after that, was I an usurer,
     And with extorting, cozening, forfeiting,
     And tricks belonging unto brokery,
     I fill'd the gaols with bankrupts in a year,
     And with young orphans planted hospitals;
     And every moon made some or other mad,
     And now and then one hang himself for grief,
     Pinning upon his breast a long great scroll
     How I with interest tormented him.
     But mark how I am blest for plaguing them;—
     I have as much coin as will buy the town.
     But tell me now, how hast thou spent thy time?

     ITHAMORE. Faith, master,
     In setting Christian villages on fire,
     Chaining of eunuchs, binding galley-slaves.
     One time I was an hostler in an inn,
     And in the night-time secretly would I steal
     To travellers' chambers, and there cut their throats:
     Once at Jerusalem, where the pilgrims kneel'd,
     I strewed powder on the marble stones,
     And therewithal their knees would rankle so,
     That I have laugh'd a-good 81 to see the cripples
     Go limping home to Christendom on stilts.

     BARABAS. Why, this is something:  make account of me
     As of thy fellow; we are villains both;
     Both circumcised; we hate Christians both:
     Be true and secret; thou shalt want no gold.
     But stand aside; here comes Don Lodowick.

          Enter LODOWICK. 82

     LODOWICK. O, Barabas, well met;
     Where is the diamond you told me of?

     BARABAS. I have it for you, sir:  please you walk in with me.—
     What, ho, Abigail! open the door, I say!

          Enter ABIGAIL, with letters.

     ABIGAIL. In good time, father; here are letters come
     ]From Ormus, and the post stays here within.

     BARABAS. Give me the letters.—Daughter, do you hear?
     Entertain Lodowick, the governor's son,
     With all the courtesy you can afford,
     Provided that you keep your maidenhead:
     Use him as if he were a Philistine;
     Dissemble, swear, protest, vow love to him: 83
     He is not of the seed of Abraham.—
          [Aside to her.]
     I am a little busy, sir; pray, pardon me.—
     Abigail, bid him welcome for my sake.

     ABIGAIL. For your sake and his own he's welcome hither.

     BARABAS. Daughter, a word more:  kiss him, speak him fair,
     And like a cunning Jew so cast about,
     That ye be both made sure 84 ere you come out.
          [Aside to her.]

     ABIGAIL. O father, Don Mathias is my love!

     BARABAS. I know it:  yet, I say, make love to him;
     Do, it is requisite it should be so.—
          [Aside to her.]
     Nay, on my life, it is my factor's hand;
     But go you in, I'll think upon the account.
          [Exeunt ABIGAIL and LODOWICK into the house.]
     The account is made, for Lodovico 85 dies.
     My factor sends me word a merchant's fled
     That owes me for a hundred tun of wine:
     I weigh it thus much[snapping his fingers]!  I have wealth enough;
     For now by this has he kiss'd Abigail,
     And she vows love to him, and he to her.
     As sure as heaven rain'd manna for the Jews,
     So sure shall he and Don Mathias die:
     His father was my chiefest enemy.

          Enter MATHIAS.

     Whither goes Don Mathias? stay a while.

     MATHIAS. Whither, but to my fair love Abigail?

     BARABAS. Thou know'st, and heaven can witness it is true,
     That I intend my daughter shall be thine.

     MATHIAS. Ay, Barabas, or else thou wrong'st me much.

     BARABAS. O, heaven forbid I should have such a thought!
     Pardon me though I weep:  the governor's son
     Will, whether I will or no, have Abigail;
     He sends her letters, bracelets, jewels, rings.

     MATHIAS. Does she receive them?

     BARABAS. She! no, Mathias, no, but sends them back;
     And, when he comes, she locks herself up fast;
     Yet through the key-hole will he talk to her,
     While she runs to the window, looking out
     When you should come and hale him from the door.

     MATHIAS. O treacherous Lodowick!

     BARABAS. Even now, as I came home, he slipt me in,
     And I am sure he is with Abigail.

     MATHIAS. I'll rouse him thence.

     BARABAS. Not for all Malta; therefore sheathe your sword;
     If you love me, no quarrels in my house;
     But steal you in, and seem to see him not:
     I'll give him such a warning ere he goes,
     As he shall have small hopes of Abigail.
     Away, for here they come.

          Re-enter LODOWICK and ABIGAIL.

     MATHIAS. What, hand in hand! I cannot suffer this.

     BARABAS. Mathias, as thou lov'st me, not a word.

     MATHIAS. Well, let it pass; another time shall serve.
          [Exit into the house.]

     LODOWICK. Barabas, is not that the widow's son?

     BARABAS. Ay, and take heed, for he hath sworn your death.

     LODOWICK. My death! what, is the base-born peasant mad?

     BARABAS. No, no; but happily 86 he stands in fear
     Of that which you, I think, ne'er dream upon,—
     My daughter here, a paltry silly girl.

     LODOWICK. Why, loves she Don Mathias?

     BARABAS. Doth she not with her smiling answer you?

     ABIGAIL. He has my heart; I smile against my will.
          [Aside.]

     LODOWICK. Barabas, thou know'st I have lov'd thy daughter long.

     BARABAS. And so has she done you, even from a child.

     LODOWICK. And now I can no longer hold my mind.

     BARABAS. Nor I the affection that I bear to you.

     LODOWICK. This is thy diamond; tell me, shall I have it?

     BARABAS. Win it, and wear it; it is yet unsoil'd. 87
     O, but I know your lordship would disdain
     To marry with the daughter of a Jew:
     And yet I'll give her many a golden cross 88
     With Christian posies round about the ring.

     LODOWICK. 'Tis not thy wealth, but her that I esteem;
     Yet crave I thy consent.

     BARABAS. And mine you have; yet let me talk to her.—
     This offspring of Cain, this Jebusite,
     That never tasted of the Passover,
     Nor e'er shall see the land of Canaan,
     Nor our Messias that is yet to come;
     This gentle maggot, Lodowick, I mean,
     Must be deluded:  let him have thy hand,
     But keep thy heart till Don Mathias comes.
          [Aside to her.]

     ABIGAIL. What, shall I be betroth'd to Lodowick?

     BARABAS. It's no sin to deceive a Christian;
     For they themselves hold it a principle,
     Faith is not to be held with heretics:
     But all are heretics that are not Jews;
     This follows well, and therefore, daughter, fear not.—
          [Aside to her.]
     I have entreated her, and she will grant.

     LODOWICK. Then, gentle Abigail, plight thy faith to me.

     ABIGAIL. I cannot choose, seeing my father bids:
     Nothing but death shall part my love and me.

     LODOWICK. Now have I that for which my soul hath long'd.

     BARABAS. So have not I; but yet I hope I shall.
          [Aside.]

     ABIGAIL. O wretched Abigail, what hast thou 89 done?
          [Aside.]

     LODOWICK. Why on the sudden is your colour chang'd?

     ABIGAIL. I know not:  but farewell; I must be gone.

     BARABAS. Stay her, but let her not speak one word more.

     LODOWICK. Mute o' the sudden! here's a sudden change.

     BARABAS. O, muse not at it; 'tis the Hebrews' guise,
     That maidens new-betroth'd should weep a while:
     Trouble her not; sweet Lodowick, depart:
     She is thy wife, and thou shalt be mine heir.

     LODOWICK. O, is't the custom? then I am resolv'd: 90
     But rather let the brightsome heavens be dim,
     And nature's beauty choke with stifling clouds,
     Than my fair Abigail should frown on me.—
     There comes the villain; now I'll be reveng'd.

          Re-enter MATHIAS.

     BARABAS. Be quiet, Lodowick; it is enough
     That I have made thee sure to Abigail.

     LODOWICK. Well, let him go.
          [Exit.]

     BARABAS. Well, but for me, as you went in at doors
     You had been stabb'd:  but not a word on't now;
     Here must no speeches pass, nor swords be drawn.

     MATHIAS. Suffer me, Barabas, but to follow him.

     BARABAS. No; so shall I, if any hurt be done,
     Be made an accessary of your deeds:
     Revenge it on him when you meet him next.

     MATHIAS. For this I'll have his heart.

     BARABAS. Do so.  Lo, here I give thee Abigail!

     MATHIAS. What greater gift can poor Mathias have?
     Shall Lodowick rob me of so fair a love?
     My life is not so dear as Abigail.

     BARABAS. My heart misgives me, that, to cross your love,
     He's with your mother; therefore after him.

     MATHIAS. What, is he gone unto my mother?

     BARABAS. Nay, if you will, stay till she comes herself.

     MATHIAS. I cannot stay; for, if my mother come,
     She'll die with grief.
          [Exit.]

     ABIGAIL. I cannot take my leave of him for tears.
     Father, why have you thus incens'd them both?

     BARABAS. What's that to thee?

     ABIGAIL. I'll make 'em friends again.

     BARABAS.
     You'll make 'em friends! are there not Jews enow in Malta,
     But thou must dote upon a Christian?

     ABIGAIL. I will have Don Mathias; he is my love.

     BARABAS. Yes, you shall have him.—Go, put her in.

     ITHAMORE. Ay, I'll put her in.
          [Puts in ABIGAIL.]

     BARABAS. Now tell me, Ithamore, how lik'st thou this?

     ITHAMORE. Faith, master, I think by this
     You purchase both their lives:  is it not so?

     BARABAS. True; and it shall be cunningly perform'd.

     ITHAMORE. O, master, that I might have a hand in this!

     BARABAS. Ay, so thou shalt; 'tis thou must do the deed:
     Take this, and bear it to Mathias straight,
          [Giving a letter.]
     And tell him that it comes from Lodowick.

     ITHAMORE. 'Tis poison'd, is it not?

     BARABAS. No, no; and yet it might be done that way:
     It is a challenge feign'd from Lodowick.

     ITHAMORE. Fear not; I will so set his heart a-fire,
     That he shall verily think it comes from him.

     BARABAS. I cannot choose but like thy readiness:
     Yet be not rash, but do it cunningly.

     ITHAMORE. As I behave myself in this, employ me hereafter.

     BARABAS. Away, then!
          [Exit ITHAMORE.]
     So; now will I go in to Lodowick,
     And, like a cunning spirit, feign some lie,
     Till I have set 'em both at enmity.
          [Exit.]




ACT III.

          Enter BELLAMIRA. 91

     BELLAMIRA. Since this town was besieg'd, my gain grows cold:
     The time has been, that but for one bare night
     A hundred ducats have been freely given;
     But now against my will I must be chaste:
     And yet I know my beauty doth not fail.
     ]From Venice merchants, and from Padua
     Were wont to come rare-witted gentlemen,
     Scholars I mean, learned and liberal;
     And now, save Pilia-Borza, comes there none,
     And he is very seldom from my house;
     And here he comes.

          Enter PILIA-BORZA.

     PILIA-BORZA.
     Hold thee, wench, there's something for thee to spend.
          [Shewing a bag of silver.]

     BELLAMIRA. 'Tis silver; I disdain it.

     PILIA-BORZA. Ay, but the Jew has gold,
     And I will have it, or it shall go hard.

     BELLAMIRA. Tell me, how cam'st thou by this?

     PILIA-BORZA. Faith, walking the back-lanes, through the gardens,
     I chanced to cast mine eye up to the Jew's counting-house, where
     I saw some bags of money, and in the night I clambered up with
     my hooks; and, as I was taking my choice, I heard a rumbling in
     the house; so I took only this, and run my way.—But here's the
     Jew's man.

     BELLAMIRA. Hide the bag.

          Enter ITHAMORE.

     PILIA-BORZA. Look not towards him, let's away.  Zoons, what a
     looking thou keepest! thou'lt betray's anon.
          [Exeunt BELLAMIRA and PILIA-BORZA.]

     ITHAMORE. O, the sweetest face that ever I beheld!  I know she
     is a courtezan by her attire:  now would I give a hundred of
     the Jew's crowns that I had such a concubine.
     Well, I have deliver'd the challenge in such sort,
     As meet they will, and fighting die,—brave sport!
          [Exit.]

          Enter MATHIAS.

     MATHIAS. This is the place: 92  now Abigail shall see
     Whether Mathias holds her dear or no.

          Enter LODOWICK.

     What, dares the villain write in such base terms?
          [Looking at a letter.]

     LODOWICK. I did it; and revenge it, if thou dar'st!
          [They fight.]

          Enter BARABAS above.

     BARABAS. O, bravely fought! and yet they thrust not home.
     Now, Lodovico! 93 now, Mathias!—So;
          [Both fall.]
     So, now they have shew'd themselves to be tall 94 fellows.

          [Cries within] Part 'em, part 'em!

     BARABAS. Ay, part 'em now they are dead.  Farewell, farewell!
          [Exit above.]

          Enter FERNEZE, KATHARINE, and ATTENDANTS.

     FERNEZE. What sight is this! 95 my Lodovico 96 slain!
     These arms of mine shall be thy sepulchre. 97

     KATHARINE. Who is this? my son Mathias slain!

     FERNEZE. O Lodowick, hadst thou perish'd by the Turk,
     Wretched Ferneze might have veng'd thy death!

     KATHARINE. Thy son slew mine, and I'll revenge his death.

     FERNEZE. Look, Katharine, look! thy son gave mine these wounds.

     KATHARINE. O, leave to grieve me!  I am griev'd enough.

     FERNEZE. O, that my sighs could turn to lively breath,
     And these my tears to blood, that he might live!

     KATHARINE. Who made them enemies?

     FERNEZE. I know not; and that grieves me most of all.

     KATHARINE. My son lov'd thine.

     FERNEZE. And so did Lodowick him.

     KATHARINE. Lend me that weapon that did kill my son,
     And it shall murder me.

     FERNEZE. Nay, madam, stay; that weapon was my son's,
     And on that rather should Ferneze die.

     KATHARINE. Hold; let's inquire the causers of their deaths,
     That we may venge their blood upon their heads.

     FERNEZE. Then take them up, and let them be interr'd
     Within one sacred monument of stone;
     Upon which altar I will offer up
     My daily sacrifice of sighs and tears,
     And with my prayers pierce impartial heavens,
     Till they [reveal] the causers of our smarts,
     Which forc'd their hands divide united hearts.
     Come, Katharine; 98 our losses equal are;
     Then of true grief let us take equal share.
          [Exeunt with the bodies.]

          Enter ITHAMORE. 99

     ITHAMORE. Why, was there ever seen such villany,
     So neatly plotted, and so well perform'd?
     Both held in hand, 100 and flatly both beguil'd?

          Enter ABIGAIL.

     ABIGAIL. Why, how now, Ithamore! why laugh'st thou so?

     ITHAMORE. O mistress! ha, ha, ha!

     ABIGAIL. Why, what ail'st thou?

     ITHAMORE. O, my master!

     ABIGAIL. Ha!

     ITHAMORE. O mistress, I have the bravest, gravest, secret,
     subtle, bottle-nosed 101 knave to my master, that ever
     gentleman had!

     ABIGAIL. Say, knave, why rail'st upon my father thus?

     ITHAMORE. O, my master has the bravest policy!

     ABIGAIL. Wherein?

     ITHAMORE. Why, know you not?

     ABIGAIL. Why, no.

     ITHAMORE.
     Know you not of Mathia[s'] and Don Lodowick['s] disaster?

     ABIGAIL. No:  what was it?

     ITHAMORE. Why, the devil inverted a challenge, my master
     writ it, and I carried it, first to Lodowick, and imprimis
     to Mathia[s];
     And then they met, [and], as the story says,
     In doleful wise they ended both their days.

     ABIGAIL. And was my father furtherer of their deaths?

     ITHAMORE. Am I Ithamore?

     ABIGAIL. Yes.

     ITHAMORE.
     So sure did your father write, and I carry the challenge.

     ABIGAIL. Well, Ithamore, let me request thee this;
     Go to the new-made nunnery, and inquire
     For any of the friars of Saint Jaques, 102
     And say, I pray them come and speak with me.

     ITHAMORE. I pray, mistress, will you answer me to one question?

     ABIGAIL. Well, sirrah, what is't?

     ITHAMORE. A very feeling one:  have not the nuns fine sport with
     the friars now and then?

     ABIGAIL. Go to, Sirrah Sauce! is this your question? get ye gone.

     ITHAMORE. I will, forsooth, mistress.
          [Exit.]

     ABIGAIL. Hard-hearted father, unkind Barabas!
     Was this the pursuit of thy policy,
     To make me shew them favour severally,
     That by my favour they should both be slain?
     Admit thou lov'dst not Lodowick for his sire, 103
     Yet Don Mathias ne'er offended thee:
     But thou wert set upon extreme revenge,
     Because the prior dispossess'd thee once,
     And couldst not venge it but upon his son;
     Nor on his son but by Mathias' means;
     Nor on Mathias but by murdering me:
     But I perceive there is no love on earth,
     Pity in Jews, nor piety in Turks.—
     But here comes cursed Ithamore with the friar.

          Re-enter ITHAMORE with FRIAR JACOMO.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Virgo, salve.

     ITHAMORE. When duck you?

     ABIGAIL. Welcome, grave friar.—Ithamore, be gone.
          [Exit ITHAMORE.]
     Know, holy sir, I am bold to solicit thee.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Wherein?

     ABIGAIL. To get me be admitted for a nun.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Why, Abigail, it is not yet long since
     That I did labour thy admission,
     And then thou didst not like that holy life.

     ABIGAIL. Then were my thoughts so frail and unconfirm'd
     As 104 I was chain'd to follies of the world:
     But now experience, purchased with grief,
     Has made me see the difference of things.
     My sinful soul, alas, hath pac'd too long
     The fatal labyrinth of misbelief,
     Far from the sun that gives eternal life!

     FRIAR JACOMO. Who taught thee this?

     ABIGAIL. The abbess of the house,
     Whose zealous admonition I embrace:
     O, therefore, Jacomo, let me be one,
     Although unworthy, of that sisterhood!

     FRIAR JACOMO. Abigail, I will:  but see thou change no more,
     For that will be most heavy to thy soul.

     ABIGAIL. That was my father's fault.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Thy father's! how?

     ABIGAIL. Nay, you shall pardon me.—O Barabas,
     Though thou deservest hardly at my hands,
     Yet never shall these lips bewray thy life!
          [Aside.]

     FRIAR JACOMO. Come, shall we go?

     ABIGAIL. My duty waits on you.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter BARABAS, 105 reading a letter.

     BARABAS. What, Abigail become a nun again!
     False and unkind! what, hast thou lost thy father?
     And, all unknown and unconstrain'd of me,
     Art thou again got to the nunnery?
     Now here she writes, and wills me to repent:
     Repentance! Spurca! what pretendeth 106 this?
     I fear she knows—'tis so—of my device
     In Don Mathias' and Lodovico's deaths:
     If so, 'tis time that it be seen into;
     For she that varies from me in belief,
     Gives great presumption that she loves me not,
     Or, loving, doth dislike of something done.—
     But who comes here?

          Enter ITHAMORE.

                         O Ithamore, come near;
     Come near, my love; come near, thy master's life,
     My trusty servant, nay, my second self; 107
     For I have now no hope but even in thee,
     And on that hope my happiness is built.
     When saw'st thou Abigail?

     ITHAMORE. To-day.

     BARABAS. With whom?

     ITHAMORE. A friar.

     BARABAS. A friar! false villain, he hath done the deed.

     ITHAMORE. How, sir!

     BARABAS. Why, made mine Abigail a nun.

     ITHAMORE. That's no lie; for she sent me for him.

     BARABAS. O unhappy day!
     False, credulous, inconstant Abigail!
     But let 'em go:  and, Ithamore, from hence
     Ne'er shall she grieve me more with her disgrace;
     Ne'er shall she live to inherit aught of mine,
     Be bless'd of me, nor come within my gates,
     But perish underneath my bitter curse,
     Like Cain by Adam for his brother's death.

     ITHAMORE. O master—

     BARABAS. Ithamore, entreat not for her; I am mov'd,
     And she is hateful to my soul and me:
     And, 'less 108 thou yield to this that I entreat,
     I cannot think but that thou hat'st my life.

     ITHAMORE. Who, I, master? why, I'll run to some rock,
     And throw myself headlong into the sea;
     Why, I'll do any thing for your sweet sake.

     BARABAS. O trusty Ithamore! no servant, but my friend!
     I here adopt thee for mine only heir:
     All that I have is thine when I am dead;
     And, whilst I live, use half; spend as myself;
     Here, take my keys,—I'll give 'em thee anon;
     Go buy thee garments; but thou shalt not want:
     Only know this, that thus thou art to do—
     But first go fetch me in the pot of rice
     That for our supper stands upon the fire.

     ITHAMORE. I hold my head, my master's hungry [Aside].—I go, sir.
          [Exit.]

     BARABAS. Thus every villain ambles after wealth,
     Although he ne'er be richer than in hope:—
     But, husht!

          Re-enter ITHAMORE with the pot.

     ITHAMORE. Here 'tis, master.

     BARABAS. Well said, 109 Ithamore!  What, hast thou brought
     The ladle with thee too?

     ITHAMORE. Yes, sir; the proverb says, 110 he that eats with the
     devil had need of a long spoon; I have brought you a ladle.

     BARABAS. Very well, Ithamore; then now be secret;
     And, for thy sake, whom I so dearly love,
     Now shalt thou see the death of Abigail,
     That thou mayst freely live to be my heir.

     ITHAMORE. Why, master, will you poison her with a mess of rice-
     porridge? that will preserve life, make her round and plump, and
     batten 111 more than you are aware.

     BARABAS. Ay, but, Ithamore, seest thou this?
     It is a precious powder that I bought
     Of an Italian, in Ancona, once,
     Whose operation is to bind, infect,
     And poison deeply, yet not appear
     In forty hours after it is ta'en.

     ITHAMORE. How, master?

     BARABAS. Thus, Ithamore:
     This even they use in Malta here,—'tis call'd
     Saint Jaques' Even,—and then, I say, they use
     To send their alms unto the nunneries:
     Among the rest, bear this, and set it there:
     There's a dark entry where they take it in,
     Where they must neither see the messenger,
     Nor make inquiry who hath sent it them.

     ITHAMORE. How so?

     BARABAS. Belike there is some ceremony in't.
     There, Ithamore, must thou go place this pot: 112
     Stay; let me spice it first.

     ITHAMORE. Pray, do, and let me help you, master.
     Pray, let me taste first.

     BARABAS. Prithee, do.[ITHAMORE tastes.]  What say'st thou now?

     ITHAMORE. Troth, master, I'm loath such a pot of pottage should
     be spoiled.

     BARABAS. Peace, Ithamore! 'tis better so than spar'd.
          [Puts the powder into the pot.]
     Assure thyself thou shalt have broth by the eye: 113
     My purse, my coffer, and myself is thine.

     ITHAMORE. Well, master, I go.

     BARABAS. Stay; first let me stir it, Ithamore.
     As fatal be it to her as the draught
     Of which great Alexander drunk, and died;
     And with her let it work like Borgia's wine,
     Whereof his sire the Pope was poisoned!
     In few, 114 the blood of Hydra, Lerna's bane,
     The juice of hebon, 115 and Cocytus' breath,
     And all the poisons of the Stygian pool,
     Break from the fiery kingdom, and in this
     Vomit your venom, and envenom her
     That, like a fiend, hath left her father thus!

     ITHAMORE. What a blessing has he given't! was ever pot of
     rice-porridge so sauced? [Aside].—What shall I do with it?

     BARABAS. O my sweet Ithamore, go set it down;
     And come again so soon as thou hast done,
     For I have other business for thee.

     ITHAMORE. Here's a drench to poison a whole stable of Flanders
     mares:  I'll carry't to the nuns with a powder.

     BARABAS. And the horse-pestilence to boot:  away!

     ITHAMORE. I am gone:
     Pay me my wages, for my work is done.
          [Exit with the pot.]

     BARABAS. I'll pay thee with a vengeance, Ithamore!
          [Exit.]

          Enter FERNEZE, 116 MARTIN DEL BOSCO, KNIGHTS, and BASSO.

     FERNEZE. Welcome, great basso: 117  how fares Calymath?
     What wind drives you thus into Malta-road?

     BASSO. The wind that bloweth all the world besides,
     Desire of gold.

     FERNEZE. Desire of gold, great sir!
     That's to be gotten in the Western Inde:
     In Malta are no golden minerals.

     BASSO. To you of Malta thus saith Calymath:
     The time you took for respite is at hand
     For the performance of your promise pass'd;
     And for the tribute-money I am sent.

     FERNEZE. Basso, in brief, shalt have no tribute here,
     Nor shall the heathens live upon our spoil:
     First will we raze the city-walls ourselves,
     Lay waste the island, hew the temples down,
     And, shipping off our goods to Sicily,
     Open an entrance for the wasteful sea,
     Whose billows, beating the resistless banks, 118
     Shall overflow it with their refluence.

     BASSO. Well, governor, since thou hast broke the league
     By flat denial of the promis'd tribute,
     Talk not of razing down your city-walls;
     You shall not need trouble yourselves so far,
     For Selim Calymath shall come himself,
     And with brass bullets batter down your towers,
     And turn proud Malta to a wilderness,
     For these intolerable wrongs of yours:
     And so, farewell.

     FERNEZE. Farewell.
          [Exit BASSO.]
     And now, you men of Malta, look about,
     And let's provide to welcome Calymath:
     Close your port-cullis, charge your basilisks, 119
     And, as you profitably take up arms,
     So now courageously encounter them,
     For by this answer broken is the league,
     And naught is to be look'd for now but wars,
     And naught to us more welcome is than wars.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter FRIAR JACOMO 120 and FRIAR BARNARDINE.

     FRIAR JACOMO. O brother, brother, all the nuns are sick,
     And physic will not help them! they must die.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. The abbess sent for me to be confess'd:
     O, what a sad confession will there be!

     FRIAR JACOMO. And so did fair Maria send for me:
     I'll to her lodging; hereabouts she lies.
          [Exit.]

          Enter ABIGAIL.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. What, all dead, save only Abigail!

     ABIGAIL. And I shall die too, for I feel death coming.
     Where is the friar that convers'd with me? 121

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. O, he is gone to see the other nuns.

     ABIGAIL. I sent for him; but, seeing you are come,
     Be you my ghostly father:  and first know,
     That in this house I liv'd religiously,
     Chaste, and devout, much sorrowing for my sins;
     But, ere I came—

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. What then?

     ABIGAIL. I did offend high heaven so grievously
     As I am almost desperate for my sins;
     And one offense torments me more than all.
     You knew Mathias and Don Lodowick?

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Yes; what of them?

     ABIGAIL. My father did contract me to 'em both;
     First to Don Lodowick:  him I never lov'd;
     Mathias was the man that I held dear,
     And for his sake did I become a nun.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. So:  say how was their end?

     ABIGAIL. Both, jealous of my love, envied 122 each other;
     And by my father's practice, 123 which is there
          [Gives writing.]
     Set down at large, the gallants were both slain.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. O, monstrous villany!

     ABIGAIL. To work my peace, this I confess to thee:
     Reveal it not; for then my father dies.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Know that confession must not be reveal'd;
     The canon-law forbids it, and the priest
     That makes it known, being degraded first,
     Shall be condemn'd, and then sent to the fire.

     ABIGAIL. So I have heard; pray, therefore, keep it close.
     Death seizeth on my heart:  ah, gentle friar,
     Convert my father that he may be sav'd,
     And witness that I die a Christian!
          [Dies.]

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Ay, and a virgin too; that grieves me most.
     But I must to the Jew, and exclaim on him,
     And make him stand in fear of me.

          Re-enter FRIAR JACOMO.

     FRIAR JACOMO. O brother, all the nuns are dead! let's bury them.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. First help to bury this; then go with me,
     And help me to exclaim against the Jew.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Why, what has he done?

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. A thing that makes me tremble to unfold.

     FRIAR JACOMO. What, has he crucified a child? 124

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. No, but a worse thing: 'twas told me in shrift;
     Thou know'st 'tis death, an if it be reveal'd.
     Come, let's away.
          [Exeunt.]




ACT IV.

          Enter BARABAS 125 and ITHAMORE.  Bells within.

     BARABAS. There is no music to 126 a Christian's knell:
     How sweet the bells ring, now the nuns are dead,
     That sound at other times like tinkers' pans!
     I was afraid the poison had not wrought,
     Or, though it wrought, it would have done no good,
     For every year they swell, and yet they live:
     Now all are dead, not one remains alive.

     ITHAMORE.
     That's brave, master:  but think you it will not be known?

     BARABAS. How can it, if we two be secret?

     ITHAMORE. For my part, fear you not.

     BARABAS. I'd cut thy throat, if I did.

     ITHAMORE. And reason too.
     But here's a royal monastery hard by;
     Good master, let me poison all the monks.

     BARABAS. Thou shalt not need; for, now the nuns are dead,
     They'll die with grief.

     ITHAMORE. Do you not sorrow for your daughter's death?

     BARABAS. No, but I grieve because she liv'd so long,
     An Hebrew born, and would become a Christian:
     Cazzo, 127 diabolo!

     ITHAMORE.
     Look, look, master; here come two religious caterpillars.

          Enter FRIAR JACOMO and FRIAR BARNARDINE.

     BARABAS. I smelt 'em ere they came.

     ITHAMORE. God-a-mercy, nose! 128 Come, let's begone.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Stay, wicked Jew; repent, I say, and stay.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Thou hast offended, therefore must be damn'd.

     BARABAS. I fear they know we sent the poison'd broth.

     ITHAMORE. And so do I, master; therefore speak 'em fair.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Barabas, thou hast—

     FRIAR JACOMO. Ay, that thou hast—

     BARABAS. True, I have money; what though I have?

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Thou art a—

     FRIAR JACOMO. Ay, that thou art, a—

     BARABAS. What needs all this? I know I am a Jew.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Thy daughter—

     FRIAR JACOMO. Ay, thy daughter—

     BARABAS. O, speak not of her! then I die with grief.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Remember that—

     FRIAR JACOMO. Ay, remember that—

     BARABAS. I must needs say that I have been a great usurer.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Thou hast committed—

     BARABAS. Fornication:  but that was in another country;
     And besides, the wench is dead.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Ay, but, Barabas,
     Remember Mathias and Don Lodowick.

     BARABAS. Why, what of them?

     FRIAR BARNARDINE.
     I will not say that by a forged challenge they met.

     BARABAS. She has confess'd, and we are both undone,
     My bosom inmate! 129 but I must dissemble.—
          [Aside to ITHAMORE.]
     O holy friars, the burden of my sins
     Lie heavy 130 on my soul! then, pray you, tell me,
     Is't not too late now to turn Christian?
     I have been zealous in the Jewish faith,
     Hard-hearted to the poor, a covetous wretch,
     That would for lucre's sake have sold my soul;
     A hundred for a hundred I have ta'en;
     And now for store of wealth may I compare
     With all the Jews in Malta:  but what is wealth?
     I am a Jew, and therefore am I lost.
     Would penance serve [to atone] for this my sin,
     I could afford to whip myself to death,—

     ITHAMORE. And so could I; but penance will not serve.

     BARABAS. To fast, to pray, and wear a shirt of hair,
     And on my knees creep to Jerusalem.
     Cellars of wine, and sollars 131 full of wheat,
     Warehouses stuff'd with spices and with drugs,
     Whole chests of gold in bullion and in coin,
     Besides, I know not how much weight in pearl
     Orient and round, have I within my house;
     At Alexandria merchandise untold; 132
     But yesterday two ships went from this town,
     Their voyage will be worth ten thousand crowns;
     In Florence, Venice, Antwerp, London, Seville,
     Frankfort, Lubeck, Moscow, and where not,
     Have I debts owing; and, in most of these,
     Great sums of money lying in the banco;
     All this I'll give to some religious house,
     So I may be baptiz'd, and live therein.

     FRIAR JACOMO. O good Barabas, come to our house!

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. O, no, good Barabas, come to our house!
     And, Barabas, you know—

     BARABAS. I know that I have highly sinn'd:
     You shall convert me, you shall have all my wealth.

     FRIAR JACOMO. O Barabas, their laws are strict!

     BARABAS. I know they are; and I will be with you.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. They wear no shirts, and they go bare-foot too.

     BARABAS. Then 'tis not for me; and I am resolv'd
     You shall confess me, and have all my goods.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Good Barabas, come to me.

     BARABAS. You see I answer him, and yet he stays;
     Rid him away, and go you home with me.

     FRIAR JACOMO. I'll be with you to-night.

     BARABAS. Come to my house at one o'clock this night.

     FRIAR JACOMO. You hear your answer, and you may be gone.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Why, go, get you away.

     FRIAR JACOMO. I will not go for thee.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. Not! then I'll make thee go.

     FRIAR JACOMO. How! dost call me rogue?

          [They fight.]

     ITHAMORE. Part 'em, master, part 'em.

     BARABAS. This is mere frailty:  brethren, be content.—
     Friar Barnardine, go you with Ithamore:
     You know my mind; let me alone with him.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Why does he go to thy house? let him be gone. 133

     BARABAS. I'll give him something, and so stop his mouth.
          [Exit ITHAMORE with Friar BARNARDINE.]
     I never heard of any man but he
     Malign'd the order of the Jacobins:
     But do you think that I believe his words?
     Why, brother, you converted Abigail;
     And I am bound in charity to requite it,
     And so I will.  O Jacomo, fail not, but come.

     FRIAR JACOMO. But, Barabas, who shall be your godfathers?
     For presently you shall be shriv'd.

     BARABAS. Marry, the Turk 134 shall be one of my godfathers,
     But not a word to any of your covent. 135

     FRIAR JACOMO. I warrant thee, Barabas.
          [Exit.]

     BARABAS. So, now the fear is past, and I am safe;
     For he that shriv'd her is within my house:
     What, if I murder'd him ere Jacomo comes?
     Now I have such a plot for both their lives,
     As never Jew nor Christian knew the like:
     One turn'd my daughter, therefore he shall die;
     The other knows enough to have my life,
     Therefore 'tis not requisite he should live. 136
     But are not both these wise men, to suppose
     That I will leave my house, my goods, and all,
     To fast and be well whipt?  I'll none of that.
     Now, Friar Barnardine, I come to you:
     I'll feast you, lodge you, give you fair 137 words,
     And, after that, I and my trusty Turk—
     No more, but so:  it must and shall be done. 138

          Enter ITHAMORE.

     Ithamore, tell me, is the friar asleep?

     ITHAMORE. Yes; and I know not what the reason is,
     Do what I can, he will not strip himself,
     Nor go to bed, but sleeps in his own clothes:
     I fear me he mistrusts what we intend.

     BARABAS. No; 'tis an order which the friars use:
     Yet, if he knew our meanings, could he scape?

     ITHAMORE. No, none can hear him, cry he ne'er so loud.

     BARABAS. Why, true; therefore did I place him there:
     The other chambers open towards the street.

     ITHAMORE. You loiter, master; wherefore stay we thus?
     O, how I long to see him shake his heels!

     BARABAS. Come on, sirrah:
     Off with your girdle; make a handsome noose.—
          [ITHAMORE takes off his girdle, and ties a noose on it.]
     Friar, awake! 139
          [They put the noose round the FRIAR'S neck.]

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. What, do you mean to strangle me?

     ITHAMORE. Yes, 'cause you use to confess.

     BARABAS. Blame not us, but the proverb,—Confess and be
     hanged.—Pull hard.

     FRIAR BARNARDINE. What, will you have 140 my life?

     BARABAS. Pull hard, I say.—You would have had my goods.

     ITHAMORE. Ay, and our lives too:—therefore pull amain.
          [They strangle the FRIAR.]
     'Tis neatly done, sir; here's no print at all.

     BARABAS. Then is it as it should be.  Take him up.

     ITHAMORE. Nay, master, be ruled by me a little.  [Takes the body,
     sets it upright against the wall, and puts a staff in its hand.]
     So, let him lean upon his staff; excellent! he stands as if he
     were begging of bacon.

     BARABAS. Who would not think but that this friar liv'd?
     What time o' night is't now, sweet Ithamore?

     ITHAMORE. Towards one. 141

     BARABAS. Then will not Jacomo be long from hence.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter FRIAR JACOMO. 142

     FRIAR JACOMO. This is the hour wherein I shall proceed; 143
     O happy hour, wherein I shall convert
     An infidel, and bring his gold into our treasury!
     But soft! is not this Barnardine? it is;
     And, understanding I should come this way,
     Stands here o' purpose, meaning me some wrong,
     And intercept my going to the Jew.—
     Barnardine!
     Wilt thou not speak? thou think'st I see thee not;
     Away, I'd wish thee, and let me go by:
     No, wilt thou not? nay, then, I'll force my way;
     And, see, a staff stands ready for the purpose.
     As thou lik'st that, stop me another time!
          [Takes the staff, and strikes down the body.]

          Enter BARABAS and ITHAMORE.

     BARABAS. Why, how now, Jacomo! what hast thou done?

     FRIAR JACOMO. Why, stricken him that would have struck at me.

     BARABAS. Who is it? Barnardine! now, out, alas, he is slain!

     ITHAMORE. Ay, master, he's slain; look how his brains drop out
     on's 144 nose.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Good sirs, I have done't:  but nobody knows it but
     you two; I may escape.

     BARABAS. So might my man and I hang with you for company.

     ITHAMORE. No; let us bear him to the magistrates.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Good Barabas, let me go.

     BARABAS. No, pardon me; the law must have his course:
     I must be forc'd to give in evidence,
     That, being importun'd by this Barnardine
     To be a Christian, I shut him out,
     And there he sate:  now I, to keep my word,
     And give my goods and substance to your house,
     Was up thus early, with intent to go
     Unto your friary, because you stay'd.

     ITHAMORE. Fie upon 'em! master, will you turn Christian, when
     holy friars turn devils and murder one another?

     BARABAS. No; for this example I'll remain a Jew:
     Heaven bless me! what, a friar a murderer!
     When shall you see a Jew commit the like?

     ITHAMORE. Why, a Turk could ha' done no more.

     BARABAS. To-morrow is the sessions; you shall to it.—
     Come, Ithamore, let's help to take him hence.

     FRIAR JACOMO. Villains, I am a sacred person; touch me not.

     BARABAS. The law shall touch you; we'll but lead you, we:
     'Las, I could weep at your calamity!—
     Take in the staff too, for that must be shown:
     Law wills that each particular be known.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter BELLAMIRA 145 and PILIA-BORZA.

     BELLAMIRA. Pilia-Borza, didst thou meet with Ithamore?

     PILIA-BORZA. I did.

     BELLAMIRA. And didst thou deliver my letter?

     PILIA-BORZA. I did.

     BELLAMIRA. And what thinkest thou? will he come?

     PILIA-BORZA. I think so:  and yet I cannot tell; for, at the
     reading of the letter, he looked like a man of another world.

     BELLAMIRA. Why so?

     PILIA-BORZA. That such a base slave as he should be saluted by
     such a tall 146 man as I am, from such a beautiful dame as you.

     BELLAMIRA. And what said he?

     PILIA-BORZA. Not a wise word; only gave me a nod, as who should
     say, "Is it even so?" and so I left him, being driven to a
     non-plus at the critical aspect of my terrible countenance.

     BELLAMIRA. And where didst meet him?

     PILIA-BORZA. Upon mine own free-hold, within forty foot of the
     gallows, conning his neck-verse, 147 I take it, looking of 148
     a friar's execution; whom I saluted with an old hempen proverb,
     Hodie tibi, cras mihi, and so I left him to the mercy of the
     hangman:  but, the exercise 149 being done, see where he comes.

          Enter ITHAMORE.

     ITHAMORE. I never knew a man take his death so patiently as
     this friar; he was ready to leap off ere the halter was about
     his neck; and, when the hangman had put on his hempen tippet,
     he made such haste to his prayers, as if he had had another
     cure to serve.  Well, go whither he will, I'll be none of his
     followers in haste:  and, now I think on't, going to the
     execution, a fellow met me with a muschatoes 150 like a raven's
     wing, and a dagger with a hilt like a warming-pan; and he gave
     me a letter from one Madam Bellamira, saluting me in such sort
     as if he had meant to make clean my boots with his lips; the
     effect was, that I should come to her house:  I wonder what the
     reason is; it may be she sees more in me than I can find in
     myself; for she writes further, that she loves me ever since she
     saw me; and who would not requite such love?  Here's her house;
     and here she comes; and now would I were gone!  I am not worthy
     to look upon her.

     PILIA-BORZA. This is the gentleman you writ to.

     ITHAMORE. Gentleman! he flouts me:  what gentry can be in a poor
     Turk of tenpence? 151  I'll be gone.
          [Aside.]

     BELLAMIRA. Is't not a sweet-faced youth, Pilia?

     ITHAMORE. Again, sweet youth! [Aside.]—Did not you, sir, bring
     the sweet youth a letter?

     PILIA-BORZA. I did, sir, and from this gentlewoman, who, as
     myself and the rest of the family, stand or fall at your service.

     BELLAMIRA. Though woman's modesty should hale me back,
     I can withhold no longer:  welcome, sweet love.

     ITHAMORE. Now am I clean, or rather foully, out of the way.
          [Aside.]

     BELLAMIRA. Whither so soon?

     ITHAMORE. I'll go steal some money from my master to make me
     handsome [Aside].—Pray, pardon me; I must go see a ship
     discharged.

     BELLAMIRA. Canst thou be so unkind to leave me thus?

     PILIA-BORZA. An ye did but know how she loves you, sir!

     ITHAMORE. Nay, I care not how much she loves me.—Sweet
     Bellamira, would I had my master's wealth for thy sake!

     PILIA-BORZA. And you can have it, sir, an if you please.

     ITHAMORE. If 'twere above ground, I could, and would have it;
     but he hides and buries it up, as partridges do their eggs,
     under the earth.

     PILIA-BORZA. And is't not possible to find it out?

     ITHAMORE. By no means possible.

     BELLAMIRA. What shall we do with this base villain, then?
          [Aside to PILIA-BORZA.]

     PILIA-BORZA. Let me alone; do but you speak him fair.—
          [Aside to her.]
     But you know 152 some secrets of the Jew,
     Which, if they were reveal'd, would do him harm.

     ITHAMORE. Ay, and such as—go to, no more! I'll make him 153
     send me half he has, and glad he scapes so too:  I'll write unto
     him; we'll have money straight.

     PILIA-BORZA. Send for a hundred crowns at least.

     ITHAMORE. Ten hundred thousand crowns.—[writing] MASTER BARABAS,—

     PILIA-BORZA. Write not so submissively, but threatening him.

     ITHAMORE. [writing] SIRRAH BARABAS, SEND ME A HUNDRED CROWNS.

     PILIA-BORZA. Put in two hundred at least.

     ITHAMORE. [writing] I CHARGE THEE SEND ME THREE HUNDRED BY THIS
     BEARER, AND THIS SHALL BE YOUR WARRANT:  IF YOU DO NOT—NO MORE,
     BUT SO.

     PILIA-BORZA. Tell him you will confess.

     ITHAMORE. [writing] OTHERWISE I'LL CONFESS ALL.—
     Vanish, and return in a twinkle.

     PILIA-BORZA. Let me alone; I'll use him in his kind.

     ITHAMORE. Hang him, Jew!
          [Exit PILIA-BORZA with the letter.]

     BELLAMIRA. Now, gentle Ithamore, lie in my lap.—
     Where are my maids? provide a cunning 154 banquet;
     Send to the merchant, bid him bring me silks;
     Shall Ithamore, my love, go in such rags?

     ITHAMORE. And bid the jeweller come hither too.

     BELLAMIRA. I have no husband; sweet, I'll marry thee.

     ITHAMORE. Content:  but we will leave this paltry land,
     And sail from hence to Greece, to lovely Greece;—
     I'll be thy Jason, thou my golden fleece;—
     Where painted carpets o'er the meads are hurl'd,
     And Bacchus' vineyards overspread the world;
     Where woods and forests go in goodly green;—
     I'll be Adonis, thou shalt be Love's Queen;—
     The meads, the orchards, and the primrose-lanes,
     Instead of sedge and reed, bear sugar-canes:
     Thou in those groves, by Dis above,
     Shalt live with me, and be my love. 155

     BELLAMIRA. Whither will I not go with gentle Ithamore?

          Re-enter PILIA-BORZA.

     ITHAMORE. How now! hast thou the gold [?]

     PILIA-BORZA. Yes.

     ITHAMORE. But came it freely? did the cow give down her milk
     freely?

     PILIA-BORZA. At reading of the letter, he stared and stamped,
     and turned aside:  I took him by the beard, 156 and looked upon
     him thus; told him he were best to send it:  then he hugged and
     embraced me.

     ITHAMORE. Rather for fear than love.

     PILIA-BORZA. Then, like a Jew, he laughed and jeered, and told
     me he loved me for your sake, and said what a faithful servant
     you had been.

     ITHAMORE. The more villain he to keep me thus:  here's goodly
     'parel, is there not?

     PILIA-BORZA. To conclude, he gave me ten crowns.
          [Delivers the money to ITHAMORE.]

     ITHAMORE. But ten? I'll not leave him worth a grey groat.  Give
     me a ream of paper:  we'll have a kingdom of gold for't. 157

     PILIA-BORZA. Write for five hundred crowns.

     ITHAMORE. [writing] SIRRAH JEW, AS YOU LOVE YOUR LIFE, SEND ME
     FIVE HUNDRED CROWNS, AND GIVE THE BEARER A HUNDRED.—Tell him
     I must have't.

     PILIA-BORZA. I warrant, your worship shall have't.

     ITHAMORE. And, if he ask why I demand so much, tell him I scorn
     to write a line under a hundred crowns.

     PILIA-BORZA. You'd make a rich poet, sir.  I am gone.
          [Exit with the letter.]

     ITHAMORE. Take thou the money; spend it for my sake.

     BELLAMIRA. 'Tis not thy money, but thyself I weigh:
     Thus Bellamira esteems of gold;
          [Throws it aside.]
     But thus of thee.
          [Kisses him.]

     ITHAMORE. That kiss again!—She runs division 158 of my
     lips.  What an eye she casts on me! it twinkles like a star.
          [Aside.]

     BELLAMIRA. Come, my dear love, let's in and sleep together.

     ITHAMORE. O, that ten thousand nights were put in one, that
     we might sleep seven years together afore we wake!

     BELLAMIRA. Come, amorous wag, first banquet, and then sleep.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter BARABAS, 159 reading a letter.

     BARABAS. BARABAS, SEND ME THREE HUNDRED CROWNS;—
     Plain Barabas!  O, that wicked courtezan!
     He was not wont to call me Barabas;—
     OR ELSE I WILL CONFESS;—ay, there it goes:
     But, if I get him, coupe de gorge for that.
     He sent a shaggy, tatter'd, 160 staring slave,
     That, when he speaks, draws out his grisly beard,
     And winds it twice or thrice about his ear;
     Whose face has been a grind-stone for men's swords;
     His hands are hack'd, some fingers cut quite off;
     Who, when he speaks, grunts like a hog, and looks
     Like one that is employ'd in catzery 161
     And cross-biting; 162 such a rogue
     As is the husband to a hundred whores;
     And I by him must send three hundred crowns.
     Well, my hope is, he will not stay there still;
     And, when he comes—O, that he were but here!

          Enter PILIA-BORZA.

     PILIA-BORZA. Jew, I must ha' more gold.

     BARABAS. Why, want'st thou any of thy tale? 163

     PILIA-BORZA. No; but three hundred will not serve his turn.

     BARABAS. Not serve his turn, sir!

     PILIA-BORZA.
     No, sir; and therefore I must have five hundred more.

     BARABAS. I'll rather——

     PILIA-BORZA. O, good words, sir, and send it you were best! see,
     there's his letter.
          [Gives letter.]

     BARABAS. Might he not as well come as send? pray, bid him come
     and fetch it:  what he writes for you, 164 ye shall have
     straight.

     PILIA-BORZA. Ay, and the rest too, or else——

     BARABAS. I must make this villain away [Aside].—Please you dine
     with me, sir—and you shall be most heartily poisoned.
          [Aside.]

     PILIA-BORZA. No, God-a-mercy.  Shall I have these crowns?

     BARABAS. I cannot do it; I have lost my keys.

     PILIA-BORZA. O, if that be all, I can pick ope your locks.

     BARABAS.
     Or climb up to my counting-house window:  you know my meaning.

     PILIA-BORZA. I know enough, and therefore talk not to me of
     your counting-house.  The gold! or know, Jew, it is in my power
     to hang thee.

     BARABAS. I am betray'd.—
          [Aside.]
     'Tis not five hundred crowns that I esteem;
     I am not mov'd at that:  this angers me,
     That he, who knows I love him as myself,
     Should write in this imperious vein.  Why, sir,
     You know I have no child, and unto whom
     Should I leave all, but unto Ithamore?

     PILIA-BORZA. Here's many words, but no crowns:  the crowns!

     BARABAS. Commend me to him, sir, most humbly,
     And unto your good mistress as unknown.

     PILIA-BORZA. Speak, shall I have 'em, sir?

     BARABAS. Sir, here they are.—
          [Gives money.]
     O, that I should part 165 with so much gold!—
          [Aside.]
     Here, take 'em, fellow, with as good a will——
     As I would see thee hang'd [Aside].  O, love stops my breath!
     Never lov'd man servant as I do Ithamore.

     PILIA-BORZA. I know it, sir.

     BARABAS. Pray, when, sir, shall I see you at my house?

     PILIA-BORZA. Soon enough to your cost, sir.  Fare you well.
          [Exit.]

     BARABAS. Nay, to thine own cost, villain, if thou com'st!
     Was ever Jew tormented as I am?
     To have a shag-rag knave to come [force from me]
     Three hundred crowns, and then five hundred crowns!
     Well; I must seek a means to rid 166 'em all,
     And presently; for in his villany
     He will tell all he knows, and I shall die for't.
     I have it:
     I will in some disguise go see the slave,
     And how the villain revels with my gold.
          [Exit.]

          Enter BELLAMIRA, 167 ITHAMORE, and PILIA-BORZA.

     BELLAMIRA. I'll pledge thee, love, and therefore drink it off.

     ITHAMORE. Say'st thou me so? have at it! and do you hear?
          [Whispers to her.]

     BELLAMIRA. Go to, it shall be so.

     ITHAMORE. Of 168 that condition I will drink it up:
     Here's to thee.

     BELLAMIRA. 169 Nay, I'll have all or none.

     ITHAMORE. There, if thou lov'st me, do not leave a drop.

     BELLAMIRA. Love thee! fill me three glasses.

     ITHAMORE. Three and fifty dozen:  I'll pledge thee.

     PILIA-BORZA. Knavely spoke, and like a knight-at-arms.

     ITHAMORE. Hey, Rivo Castiliano! 170 a man's a man.

     BELLAMIRA. Now to the Jew.

     ITHAMORE. Ha! to the Jew; and send me money he 171 were best.

     PILIA-BORZA. What wouldst thou do, if he should send thee none?

     ITHAMORE. Do nothing:  but I know what I know; he's a murderer.

     BELLAMIRA. I had not thought he had been so brave a man.

     ITHAMORE. You knew Mathias and the governor's son; he and I
     killed 'em both, and yet never touched 'em.

     PILIA-BORZA. O, bravely done!

     ITHAMORE. I carried the broth that poisoned the nuns; and he
     and I, snicle hand too fast, strangled a friar. 172

     BELLAMIRA. You two alone?

     ITHAMORE.
     We two; and 'twas never known, nor never shall be for me.

     PILIA-BORZA. This shall with me unto the governor.
          [Aside to BELLAMIRA.]

     BELLAMIRA. And fit it should:  but first let's ha' more gold.—
          [Aside to PILIA-BORZA.]
     Come, gentle Ithamore, lie in my lap.

     ITHAMORE. Love me little, love me long:  let music rumble,
     Whilst I in thy incony 173 lap do tumble.

          Enter BARABAS, disguised as a French musician, with a lute,
          and a nosegay in his hat.

     BELLAMIRA. A French musician!—Come, let's hear your skill.

     BARABAS. Must tuna my lute for sound, twang, twang, first.

     ITHAMORE. Wilt drink, Frenchman? here's to thee with a—Pox on
     this drunken hiccup!

     BARABAS. Gramercy, monsieur.

     BELLAMIRA. Prithee, Pilia-Borza, bid the fiddler give me the
     posy in his hat there.

     PILIA-BORZA. Sirrah, you must give my mistress your posy.

     BARABAS. A votre commandement, madame.
          [Giving nosegay.]

     BELLAMIRA. How sweet, my Ithamore, the flowers smell!

     ITHAMORE. Like thy breath, sweetheart; no violet like 'em.

     PILIA-BORZA. Foh! methinks they stink like a hollyhock. 174

     BARABAS. So, now I am reveng'd upon 'em all:
     The scent thereof was death; I poison'd it.
          [Aside.]

     ITHAMORE.
     Play, fiddler, or I'll cut your cat's guts into chitterlings.

     BARABAS.
     Pardonnez moi, be no in tune yet:  so, now, now all be in.

     ITHAMORE. Give him a crown, and fill me out more wine.

     PILIA-BORZA. There's two crowns for thee:  play.
          [Giving money.]

     BARABAS. How liberally the villain gives me mine own gold!
          [Aside, and then plays.]

     PILIA-BORZA. Methinks he fingers very well.

     BARABAS. So did you when you stole my gold.
          [Aside.]

     PILIA-BORZA. How swift he runs!

     BARABAS. You run swifter when you threw my gold out of my window.
          [Aside.]

     BELLAMIRA. Musician, hast been in Malta long?

     BARABAS. Two, three, four month, madam.

     ITHAMORE. Dost not know a Jew, one Barabas?

     BARABAS. Very mush:  monsieur, you no be his man?

     PILIA-BORZA. His man!

     ITHAMORE. I scorn the peasant:  tell him so.

     BARABAS. He knows it already.
          [Aside.]

     ITHAMORE. 'Tis a strange thing of that Jew, he lives upon
     pickled grasshoppers and sauced mushrooms. 175

     BARABAS. What a slave's this! the governor feeds not as I do.
          [Aside.]

     ITHAMORE. He never put on clean shirt since he was circumcised.

     BARABAS. O rascal! I change myself twice a-day.
          [Aside.]

     ITHAMORE. The hat he wears, Judas left under the elder when he
     hanged himself. 176

     BARABAS. 'Twas sent me for a present from the Great Cham.
          [Aside.]

     PILIA-BORZA. A nasty 177 slave he is.—Whither now, fiddler?

     BARABAS. Pardonnez moi, monsieur; me 178 be no well.

     PILIA-BORZA. Farewell, fiddler [Exit BARABAS.] One letter more
     to the Jew.

     BELLAMIRA. Prithee, sweet love, one more, and write it sharp.

     ITHAMORE. No, I'll send by word of mouth now.
     —Bid him deliver thee a thousand crowns, by the same token
     that the nuns loved rice, that Friar Barnardine slept in his
     own clothes; any of 'em will do it.

     PILIA-BORZA. Let me alone to urge it, now I know the meaning.

     ITHAMORE. The meaning has a meaning.  Come, let's in:
     To undo a Jew is charity, and not sin.
          [Exeunt.]




ACT V.

          Enter FERNEZE, 179 KNIGHTS, MARTIN DEL BOSCO, and OFFICERS.

     FERNEZE. Now, gentlemen, betake you to your arms,
     And see that Malta be well fortified;
     And it behoves you to be resolute;
     For Calymath, having hover'd here so long,
     Will win the town, or die before the walls.

     FIRST KNIGHT. And die he shall; for we will never yield.

          Enter BELLAMIRA and PILIA-BORZA.

     BELLAMIRA. O, bring us to the governor!

     FERNEZE. Away with her! she is a courtezan.

     BELLAMIRA. Whate'er I am, yet, governor, hear me speak:
     I bring thee news by whom thy son was slain:
     Mathias did it not; it was the Jew.

     PILIA-BORZA. Who, besides the slaughter of these gentlemen,
     Poison'd his own daughter and the nuns,
     Strangled a friar, and I know not what
     Mischief beside.

     FERNEZE. Had we but proof of this——

     BELLAMIRA. Strong proof, my lord:  his man's now at my lodging,
     That was his agent; he'll confess it all.

     FERNEZE. Go fetch him 180 straight [Exeunt OFFICERS].
     I always fear'd that Jew.

          Re-enter OFFICERS with BARABAS and ITHAMORE.

     BARABAS. I'll go alone; dogs, do not hale me thus.

     ITHAMORE.
     Nor me neither; I cannot out-run you, constable.—O, my belly!

     BARABAS. One dram of powder more had made all sure:
     What a damn'd slave was I!
          [Aside.]

     FERNEZE. Make fires, heat irons, let the rack be fetch'd.

     FIRST KNIGHT. Nay, stay, my lord; 't may be he will confess.

     BARABAS. Confess! what mean you, lords? who should confess?

     FERNEZE. Thou and thy Turk; 'twas that slew my son.

     ITHAMORE. Guilty, my lord, I confess.  Your son and Mathias
     were both contracted unto Abigail: [he] forged a counterfeit
     challenge.

     BARABAS. Who carried that challenge?

     ITHAMORE.
     I carried it, I confess; but who writ it? marry, even he that
     strangled Barnardine, poisoned the nuns and his own daughter.

     FERNEZE. Away with him! his sight is death to me.

     BARABAS. For what, you men of Malta? hear me speak.
     She is a courtezan, and he a thief,
     And he my bondman:  let me have law;
     For none of this can prejudice my life.

     FERNEZE. Once more, away with him!—You shall have law.

     BARABAS. Devils, do your worst!—I['ll] live in spite of you.—
          [Aside.]
     As these have spoke, so be it to their souls!—
     I hope the poison'd flowers will work anon.
          [Aside.]
          [Exeunt OFFICERS with BARABAS and ITHAMORE; BELLAMIRA,
          and PILIA-BORZA.]

          Enter KATHARINE.

     KATHARINE. Was my Mathias murder'd by the Jew?
     Ferneze, 'twas thy son that murder'd him.

     FERNEZE. Be patient, gentle madam:  it was he;
     He forg'd the daring challenge made them fight.

     KATHARINE. Where is the Jew? where is that murderer?

     FERNEZE. In prison, till the law has pass'd on him.

          Re-enter FIRST OFFICER.

     FIRST OFFICER. My lord, the courtezan and her man are dead;
     So is the Turk and Barabas the Jew.

     FERNEZE. Dead!

     FIRST OFFICER. Dead, my lord, and here they bring his body.

     MARTIN DEL BOSCO. This sudden death of his is very strange.

          Re-enter OFFICERS, carrying BARABAS as dead.

     FERNEZE. Wonder not at it, sir; the heavens are just;
     Their deaths were like their lives; then think not of 'em.—
     Since they are dead, let them be buried:
     For the Jew's body, throw that o'er the walls,
     To be a prey for vultures and wild beasts.—
     So, now away and fortify the town.

          Exeunt all, leaving BARABAS on the floor. 181

     BARABAS. [rising] What, all alone! well fare, sleepy drink!
     I'll be reveng'd on this accursed town;
     For by my means Calymath shall enter in:
     I'll help to slay their children and their wives,
     To fire the churches, pull their houses down,
     Take my goods too, and seize upon my lands.
     I hope to see the governor a slave,
     And, rowing in a galley, whipt to death.

          Enter CALYMATH, BASSOES, 182 and TURKS.

     CALYMATH. Whom have we there? a spy?

     BARABAS. Yes, my good lord, one that can spy a place
     Where you may enter, and surprize the town:
     My name is Barabas; I am a Jew.

     CALYMATH. Art thou that Jew whose goods we heard were sold
     For tribute-money?

     BARABAS. The very same, my lord:
     And since that time they have hir'd a slave, my man,
     To accuse me of a thousand villanies:
     I was imprisoned, but scap [']d their hands.

     CALYMATH. Didst break prison?

     BARABAS. No, no:
     I drank of poppy and cold mandrake juice;
     And being asleep, belike they thought me dead,
     And threw me o'er the walls:  so, or how else,
     The Jew is here, and rests at your command.

     CALYMATH. 'Twas bravely done:  but tell me, Barabas,
     Canst thou, as thou report'st, make Malta ours?

     BARABAS. Fear not, my lord; for here, against the trench, 183
     The rock is hollow, and of purpose digg'd,
     To make a passage for the running streams
     And common channels 184 of the city.
     Now, whilst you give assault unto the walls,
     I'll lead five hundred soldiers through the vault,
     And rise with them i' the middle of the town,
     Open the gates for you to enter in;
     And by this means the city is your own.

     CALYMATH. If this be true, I'll make thee governor.

     BARABAS. And, if it be not true, then let me die.

     CALYMATH. Thou'st doom'd thyself.—Assault it presently.
          [Exeunt.]

          Alarums within.  Enter CALYMATH, 185 BASSOES, TURKS, and
          BARABAS; with FERNEZE and KNIGHTS prisoners.

     CALYMATH. Now vail 186 your pride, you captive Christians,
     And kneel for mercy to your conquering foe:
     Now where's the hope you had of haughty Spain?
     Ferneze, speak; had it not been much better
     To kept 187 thy promise than be thus surpris'd?

     FERNEZE. What should I say? we are captives, and must yield.

     CALYMATH. Ay, villains, you must yield, and under Turkish yokes
     Shall groaning bear the burden of our ire:—
     And, Barabas, as erst we promis'd thee,
     For thy desert we make thee governor;
     Use them at thy discretion.

     BARABAS. Thanks, my lord.

     FERNEZE. O fatal day, to fall into the hands
     Of such a traitor and unhallow'd Jew!
     What greater misery could heaven inflict?

     CALYMATH. 'Tis our command:—and, Barabas, we give,
     To guard thy person, these our Janizaries:
     Entreat 188 them well, as we have used thee.—
     And now, brave bassoes, 189 come; we'll walk about
     The ruin'd town, and see the wreck we made.—
     Farewell, brave Jew, farewell, great Barabas!

     BARABAS. May all good fortune follow Calymath!
          [Exeunt CALYMATH and BASSOES.]
     And now, as entrance to our safety,
     To prison with the governor and these
     Captains, his consorts and confederates.

     FERNEZE. O villain! heaven will be reveng'd on thee.

     BARABAS. Away! no more; let him not trouble me.
          [Exeunt TURKS with FERNEZE and KNIGHTS.]
     Thus hast thou gotten, 190 by thy policy,
     No simple place, no small authority:
     I now am governor of Malta; true,—
     But Malta hates me, and, in hating me,
     My life's in danger; and what boots it thee,
     Poor Barabas, to be the governor,
     Whenas 191 thy life shall be at their command?
     No, Barabas, this must be look'd into;
     And, since by wrong thou gott'st authority,
     Maintain it bravely by firm policy;
     At least, unprofitably lose it not;
     For he that liveth in authority,
     And neither gets him friends nor fills his bags,
     Lives like the ass that Aesop speaketh of,
     That labours with a load of bread and wine,
     And leaves it off to snap on thistle-tops:
     But Barabas will be more circumspect.
     Begin betimes; Occasion's bald behind:
     Slip not thine opportunity, for fear too late
     Thou seek'st for much, but canst not compass it.—
     Within here! 192

          Enter FERNEZE, with a GUARD.

     FERNEZE. My lord?

     BARABAS. Ay, LORD; thus slaves will learn.
     Now, governor,—stand by there, wait within,—
          [Exeunt GUARD.]
     This is the reason that I sent for thee:
     Thou seest thy life and Malta's happiness
     Are at my arbitrement; and Barabas
     At his discretion may dispose of both:
     Now tell me, governor, and plainly too,
     What think'st thou shall become of it and thee?

     FERNEZE. This, Barabas; since things are in thy power,
     I see no reason but of Malta's wreck,
     Nor hope of thee but extreme cruelty:
     Nor fear I death, nor will I flatter thee.

     BARABAS. Governor, good words; be not so furious
     'Tis not thy life which can avail me aught;
     Yet you do live, and live for me you shall:
     And as for Malta's ruin, think you not
     'Twere slender policy for Barabas
     To dispossess himself of such a place?
     For sith, 193 as once you said, within this isle,
     In Malta here, that I have got my goods,
     And in this city still have had success,
     And now at length am grown your governor,
     Yourselves shall see it shall not be forgot;
     For, as a friend not known but in distress,
     I'll rear up Malta, now remediless.

     FERNEZE. Will Barabas recover Malta's loss?
     Will Barabas be good to Christians?

     BARABAS. What wilt thou give me, governor, to procure
     A dissolution of the slavish bands
     Wherein the Turk hath yok'd your land and you?
     What will you give me if I render you
     The life of Calymath, surprise his men,
     And in an out-house of the city shut
     His soldiers, till I have consum'd 'em all with fire?
     What will you give him that procureth this?

     FERNEZE. Do but bring this to pass which thou pretendest,
     Deal truly with us as thou intimatest,
     And I will send amongst the citizens,
     And by my letters privately procure
     Great sums of money for thy recompense:
     Nay, more, do this, and live thou governor still.

     BARABAS. Nay, do thou this, Ferneze, and be free:
     Governor, I enlarge thee; live with me;
     Go walk about the city, see thy friends:
     Tush, send not letters to 'em; go thyself,
     And let me see what money thou canst make:
     Here is my hand that I'll set Malta free;
     And thus we cast 194 it:  to a solemn feast
     I will invite young Selim Calymath,
     Where be thou present, only to perform
     One stratagem that I'll impart to thee,
     Wherein no danger shall betide thy life,
     And I will warrant Malta free for ever.

     FERNEZE. Here is my hand; believe me, Barabas,
     I will be there, and do as thou desirest.
     When is the time?

     BARABAS. Governor, presently;
     For Calymath, when he hath view'd the town,
     Will take his leave, and sail toward Ottoman.

     FERNEZE. Then will I, Barabas, about this coin,
     And bring it with me to thee in the evening.

     BARABAS. Do so; but fail not:  now farewell, Ferneze:—
          [Exit FERNEZE.]
     And thus far roundly goes the business:
     Thus, loving neither, will I live with both,
     Making a profit of my policy;
     And he from whom my most advantage comes,
     Shall be my friend.
     This is the life we Jews are us'd to lead;
     And reason too, for Christians do the like.
     Well, now about effecting this device;
     First, to surprise great Selim's soldiers,
     And then to make provision for the feast,
     That at one instant all things may be done:
     My policy detests prevention.
     To what event my secret purpose drives,
     I know; and they shall witness with their lives.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter CALYMATH and BASSOES. 195

     CALYMATH. Thus have we view'd the city, seen the sack,
     And caus'd the ruins to be new-repair'd,
     Which with our bombards' shot and basilisk[s] 196
     We rent in sunder at our entry:
     And, now I see the situation,
     And how secure this conquer'd island stands,
     Environ'd with the Mediterranean sea,
     Strong-countermin'd with other petty isles,
     And, toward Calabria, 197 back'd by Sicily
     (Where Syracusian Dionysius reign'd),
     Two lofty turrets that command the town,
     I wonder how it could be conquer'd thus.

          Enter a MESSENGER.

     MESSENGER. From Barabas, Malta's governor, I bring
     A message unto mighty Calymath:
     Hearing his sovereign was bound for sea,
     To sail to Turkey, to great Ottoman,
     He humbly would entreat your majesty
     To come and see his homely citadel,
     And banquet with him ere thou leav'st the isle.

     CALYMATH. To banquet with him in his citadel!
     I fear me, messenger, to feast my train
     Within a town of war so lately pillag'd,
     Will be too costly and too troublesome:
     Yet would I gladly visit Barabas,
     For well has Barabas deserv'd of us.

     MESSENGER. Selim, for that, thus saith the governor,—
     That he hath in [his] store a pearl so big,
     So precious, and withal so orient,
     As, be it valu'd but indifferently,
     The price thereof will serve to entertain
     Selim and all his soldiers for a month;
     Therefore he humbly would entreat your highness
     Not to depart till he has feasted you.

     CALYMATH. I cannot feast my men in Malta-walls,
     Except he place his tables in the streets.

     MESSENGER. Know, Selim, that there is a monastery
     Which standeth as an out-house to the town;
     There will he banquet them; but thee at home,
     With all thy bassoes and brave followers.

     CALYMATH. Well, tell the governor we grant his suit;
     We'll in this summer-evening feast with him.

     MESSENGER. I shall, my lord.
          [Exit.]

     CALYMATH. And now, bold bassoes, let us to our tents,
     And meditate how we may grace us best,
     To solemnize our governor's great feast.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter FERNEZE, 198 KNIGHTS, and MARTIN DEL BOSCO.

     FERNEZE. In this, my countrymen, be rul'd by me:
     Have special care that no man sally forth
     Till you shall hear a culverin discharg'd
     By him that bears the linstock, 199 kindled thus;
     Then issue out and come to rescue me,
     For happily I shall be in distress,
     Or you released of this servitude.

     FIRST KNIGHT. Rather than thus to live as Turkish thralls,
     What will we not adventure?

     FERNEZE. On, then; be gone.

     KNIGHTS. Farewell, grave governor.
          [Exeunt, on one side, KNIGHTS and MARTIN DEL BOSCO;
          on the other, FERNEZE.]

          Enter, above, 200 BARABAS, with a hammer, very busy;
          and CARPENTERS.

     BARABAS. How stand the cords? how hang these hinges? fast?
     Are all the cranes and pulleys sure?

     FIRST CARPENTER. 201 All fast.

     BARABAS. Leave nothing loose, all levell'd to my mind.
     Why, now I see that you have art, indeed:
     There, carpenters, divide that gold amongst you;
          [Giving money.]
     Go, swill in bowls of sack and muscadine;
     Down to the cellar, taste of all my wines.

     FIRST CARPENTER. We shall, my lord, and thank you.
          [Exeunt CARPENTERS.]

     BARABAS. And, if you like them, drink your fill and die;
     For, so I live, perish may all the world!
     Now, Selim Calymath, return me word
     That thou wilt come, and I am satisfied.

          Enter MESSENGER.

     Now, sirrah; what, will he come?

     MESSENGER. He will; and has commanded all his men
     To come ashore, and march through Malta-streets,
     That thou mayst feast them in thy citadel.

     BARABAS. Then now are all things as my wish would have 'em;
     There wanteth nothing but the governor's pelf;
     And see, he brings it.

          Enter FERNEZE.

                             Now, governor, the sum?

     FERNEZE. With free consent, a hundred thousand pounds.

     BARABAS. Pounds say'st thou, governor? well, since it is no more,
     I'll satisfy myself with that; nay, keep it still,
     For, if I keep not promise, trust not me:
     And, governor, now partake my policy.
     First, for his army, they are sent before,
     Enter'd the monastery, and underneath
     In several places are field-pieces pitch'd,
     Bombards, whole barrels full of gunpowder,
     That on the sudden shall dissever it,
     And batter all the stones about their ears,
     Whence none can possibly escape alive:
     Now, as for Calymath and his consorts,
     Here have I made a dainty gallery,
     The floor whereof, this cable being cut,
     Doth fall asunder, so that it doth sink
     Into a deep pit past recovery.
     Here, hold that knife; and, when thou seest he comes,
          [Throws down a knife.]
     And with his bassoes shall be blithely set,
     A warning-piece shall be shot off 202 from the tower,
     To give thee knowledge when to cut the cord,
     And fire the house.  Say, will not this be brave?

     FERNEZE. O, excellent! here, hold thee, Barabas;
     I trust thy word; take what I promis'd thee.

     BARABAS. No, governor; I'll satisfy thee first;
     Thou shalt not live in doubt of any thing.
     Stand close, for here they come.
          [FERNEZE retires.]
                                       Why, is not this
     A kingly kind of trade, to purchase towns
     By treachery, and sell 'em by deceit?
     Now tell me, worldlings, underneath the sun 203
     If greater falsehood ever has been done?

          Enter CALYMATH and BASSOES.

     CALYMATH. Come, my companion-bassoes:  see, I pray,
     How busy Barabas is there above
     To entertain us in his gallery:
     Let us salute him.—Save thee, Barabas!

     BARABAS. Welcome, great Calymath!

     FERNEZE. How the slave jeers at him!
          [Aside.]

     BARABAS. Will't please thee, mighty Selim Calymath,
     To ascend our homely stairs?

     CALYMATH. Ay, Barabas.—
     Come, bassoes, ascend. 204

     FERNEZE. [coming forward] Stay, Calymath;
     For I will shew thee greater courtesy
     Than Barabas would have afforded thee.

     KNIGHT. [within] Sound a charge there!
          [A charge sounded within:  FERNEZE cuts the cord; the floor
          of the gallery gives way, and BARABAS falls into a caldron
          placed in a pit.

          Enter KNIGHTS and MARTIN DEL BOSCO. 205

     CALYMATH. How now! what means this?

     BARABAS. Help, help me, Christians, help!

     FERNEZE. See, Calymath! this was devis'd for thee.

     CALYMATH. Treason, treason! bassoes, fly!

     FERNEZE. No, Selim, do not fly:
     See his end first, and fly then if thou canst.

     BARABAS. O, help me, Selim! help me, Christians!
     Governor, why stand you all so pitiless?

     FERNEZE. Should I in pity of thy plaints or thee,
     Accursed Barabas, base Jew, relent?
     No, thus I'll see thy treachery repaid,
     But wish thou hadst behav'd thee otherwise.

     BARABAS. You will not help me, then?

     FERNEZE. No, villain, no.

     BARABAS. And, villains, know you cannot help me now.—
     Then, Barabas, breathe forth thy latest fate,
     And in the fury of thy torments strive
     To end thy life with resolution.—
     Know, governor, 'twas I that slew thy son,—
     I fram'd the challenge that did make them meet:
     Know, Calymath, I aim'd thy overthrow:
     And, had I but escap'd this stratagem,
     I would have brought confusion on you all,
     Damn'd Christian 206 dogs, and Turkish infidels!
     But now begins the extremity of heat
     To pinch me with intolerable pangs:
     Die, life! fly, soul! tongue, curse thy fill, and die!
          [Dies.]

     CALYMATH. Tell me, you Christians, what doth this portend?

     FERNEZE. This train 207 he laid to have entrapp'd thy life;
     Now, Selim, note the unhallow'd deeds of Jews;
     Thus he determin'd to have handled thee,
     But I have rather chose to save thy life.

     CALYMATH. Was this the banquet he prepar'd for us?
     Let's hence, lest further mischief be pretended. 208

     FERNEZE. Nay, Selim, stay; for, since we have thee here,
     We will not let thee part so suddenly:
     Besides, if we should let thee go, all's one,
     For with thy galleys couldst thou not get hence,
     Without fresh men to rig and furnish them.

     CALYMATH. Tush, governor, take thou no care for that;
     My men are all aboard,
     And do attend my coming there by this.

     FERNEZE. Why, heard'st thou not the trumpet sound a charge?

     CALYMATH. Yes, what of that?

     FERNEZE. Why, then the house was fir'd,
     Blown up, and all thy soldiers massacred.

     CALYMATH. O, monstrous treason!

     FERNEZE. A Jew's courtesy;
     For he that did by treason work our fall,
     By treason hath deliver'd thee to us:
     Know, therefore, till thy father hath made good
     The ruins done to Malta and to us,
     Thou canst not part; for Malta shall be freed,
     Or Selim ne'er return to Ottoman.

     CALYMATH. Nay, rather, Christians, let me go to Turkey,
     In person there to mediate 209 your peace:
     To keep me here will naught advantage you.

     FERNEZE. Content thee, Calymath, here thou must stay,
     And live in Malta prisoner; for come all 210 the world
     To rescue thee, so will we guard us now,
     As sooner shall they drink the ocean dry,
     Than conquer Malta, or endanger us.
     So, march away; and let due praise be given
     Neither to Fate nor Fortune, but to Heaven.
          [Exeunt.]

Enter GAVESTON, reading a letter.

Gav. My father is deceas'd. Come, Gaveston,
   And share the kingdom with thy dearest friend.
   Ah, words that make me surfeit with delight!
   What greater bliss can hap to Gaveston
   Than live and be the favourite of a king!
   Sweet prince, I come! these, thy amorous lines
   Might have enforc'd me to have swum from France,
   And, like Leander, gasp'd upon the sand,
   So thou wouldst smile, and take me in thine arms.
   The sight of London to my exil'd eyes
   Is as Elysium to a new-come soul:
   Not that I love the city or the men,
   But that it harbours him I hold so dear,—
   The king, upon whose bosom let me lie,
   And with the world be still at enmity.
   What need the arctic people love star-light,
   To whom the sun shines both by day and night?
   Farewell base stooping to the lordly peers!
   My knee shall bow to none but to the king.
   As for the multitude, that are but sparks,
   Rak'd up in embers of their poverty,—
   Tanti,—I'll fawn first on the wind,
   That glanceth at my lips, and flieth away.
Enter three Poor Men.

   But how now! what are these?
Poor Men. Such as desire your worship's service.
Gav. What canst thou do?
First P. Man. I can ride.
Gav. But I have no horse.—What art thou?
Sec. P. Man. A traveller.
Gav. Let me see; thou wouldst do well
   To wait at my trencher, and tell me lies at dinner-time;
   And, as I like your discoursing, I'll have you.—
   And what art thou?
Third P. Man. A soldier, that hath serv'd against the Scot.
Gav. Why, there are hospitals for such as you:
   I have no war; and therefore, sir, be gone.
Third P. Man. Farewell, and perish by a soldier's hand,
   That wouldst reward them with an hospital!
Gav. Ay, ay, these words of his move me as much
   As if a goose should play the porcupine,
   And dart her plumes, thinking to pierce my breast.
   But yet it is no pain to speak men fair;
   I'll flatter these, and make them live in hope.— [Aside.
   You know that I came lately out of France,
   And yet I have not view'd my lord the king:
   If I speed well, I'll entertain you all.
All. We thank your worship.
Gav. I have some business: leave me to myself.
All. We will wait here about the court.
Gav. Do. [Exeunt Poor Men.
            These are not men for me;
   I must have wanton poets, pleasant wits,
   Musicians, that with touching of a string
   May draw the pliant king which way I please:
   Music and poetry is his delight;
   Therefore I'll have Italian masks by night,
   Sweet speeches, comedies, and pleasing shows;
   And in the day, when he shall walk abroad,
   Like sylvan nymphs my pages shall be clad;
   My men, like satyrs grazing on the lawns,
   Shall with their goat-feet dance the antic hay;
   Sometime a lovely boy in Dian's shape,
   With hair that gilds the water as it glides
   Crownets of pearl about his naked arms,
   And in his sportful hands an olive-tree,
   To hide those parts which men delight to see,
   Shall bathe him in a spring; and there, hard by,
   One like Actæon, peeping through the grove,
   Shall by the angry goddess be transform'd,
   And running in the likeness of an hart,
   By yelping hounds pull'd down, shall semm to die:
   Such things as these best please his majesty.—
   Here comes my lord the king, and the nobles,
   From the parliament. I'll stand aside. [Retires.
Enter KING EDWARD, KENT, LANCASTER, the elder MORTIMER,
      the younger MORTIMER, WARWICK, PEMBROKE, and
      Attendants.
K. Edw. Lancaster!
Lan. My lord?
Gav. That Earl of Lancaster do I abhor. [Aside.
K. Edw. Will you not grant me this?—In spite of them
   I'll have my will; and these two Mortimers,
   That cross me thus, shall know I am displeased. [Aside.
E. Mor. If you love us, my lord, hate Gaveston.
Gav. That villain Mortimer! I'll be his death. [Aside.
__Y. Mor._ Mine uncle here, this earl, and I myself,
   Were sworn to your father at his death,
   That he should ne'er return into the realm:
   And now, my lord, ere I will break my oath,
   This sword of mine, that should offend your foes,
   Shall sleep within the scabbard at thy need,
   And underneath thy banners march who will,
   For Mortimer will hang his armour up.
Gav. Mort dieu! [Aside.
K. Edw. Well, Mortimer, I'll make thee rue these words:
   Beseems it thee to contradict thy king?
   Frown'st thou thereat, aspiring Lancaster?
   The sword shall plane the furrows of thy brows,
   And hew these knees that now are grown so stiff.
   I will have Gaveston; and you shall know
   What danger 'tis to stand against your king.
Gav. Well done, Ned! [Aside.
Lan. My lord, why do you thus incense your peers,
   That naturally would love and honour you,
   But for that base and obscure Gaveston?
   Four earldoms have I, besides Lancaster,—
   Derby, Salisbury, Lincoln, Leicester;
   These will I sell, to give my soldiers pay,
   Ere Gaveston shall stay within the realm:
   Therefore, if he be come, expel him straight.
Kent. Barons and earls, your pride hath made me mute;
   But know I'll speak, and to the proof, I hope.
   I do remember, in my father's days,
   Lord Percy of the North, being highly mov'd,
   Brav'd Mowbray in presence of the king;
   For which, had not his highness lov'd him well,
   He should have lost his head; but with his look
   Th' undaunted spirit of Percy was appeas'd,
   And Mowbray and he were reconcil'd:
   Yet dare you brave the king unto his face.—
   Brother, revenge it, and let these their heads
   Preach upon poles, for trespass of their tongues.
War. O, our heads!
K. Edw. Ay, yours; and therefore I would wish you grant.
War. Bridle thy anger, gentle Mortimer.
Y. Mor. I cannot, nor I will not; I must speak.—
   Cousin, our hands I hope shall fence our heads,
   And strike off his that makes you threaten us.—
   Come, uncle, let us leave the brain-sick king,
   And henceforth parley with our naked swords.
E. Mor. Wiltshire hath men enough to save our heads.
War. All Warwickshire will leave him for my sake.
Lan. And northward Lancaster hath many friends.—
   Adieu, my lord; and either change your mind,
   Or look to see the throne, where you should sit,
   To float in blood, and at thy wanton head
   The glozing head of thy base minion thrown.
       [Exeunt all except King Edward, Kent, Gaveston,
          and attendants.
K. Edw. I cannot brook these haughty menaces:
   Am I a king, and must be over-rul'd!—
   Brother, display my ensigns in the field:
   I'll bandy with the barons and the earls,
   And either die or live with Gaveston.
Gav. I can no longer keep me from my lord. [Comes forward.
K. Edw. What, Gaveston! welcome! Kiss not my hand:
   Embrace me, Gaveston, as I do thee.
   Why shouldst thou kneel? know'st thou not who I am?
   Thy friend, thyself, another Gaveston:
   Not Hylas was more mourned for of Hercules
   Than thou hast been of me since thy exile.
Gav. And, since I went from hence, no soul in hell
   Hath felt more torment than poor Gaveston.
K. Edw. I know it.—Brother, welcome home my friend.—
   Now let the treacherous Mortimers conspire,
   And that high-minded Earl of Lancaster:
   I have my wish, in that I joy thy sight;
   And sooner shall the sea o'erwhelm my land
   Than bear the ship that shall transport thee hence.
   I here create thee Lord High-chamberlain,
   Chief Secretary to the state and me,
   Earl of Cornwall, King and Lord of Man.
Gav. My lord, these titles far exceed my worth.
Kent. Brother, the least of these may well suffice
   For one of greater birth than Gaveston.
K. Edw. Cease, brother, for I cannot brook these words.—
   Thy worth, sweet friend, is far above my gifts:
   Therefore, to equal it, receive my heart.
   If for these dignities thou be envied,
   I'll give thee more; for, but to honour thee,
   Is Edward pleas'd with kingly regiment.
   Fear'st thou thy person? thou shalt have a guard:
   Wantest thou gold? go to my treasury:
   Wouldst thou be lov'd and fear'd? receive my seal,
   Save or condemn, and in our name command
   What so thy mind affects, or fancy likes.
Gav. It shall suffice me to enjoy your love;
   Which whiles I have, I think myself as great
   As Cæsar riding in the Roman street,
   With captive kings at his triumphant car.
Enter the BISHOP OF COVENTRY.

K. Edw. Whither goes my Lord of Coventry so fast? Bish. of Cov. To celebrate your father's exequies. But is that wicked Gaveston return'd? K. Edw. Ay, priest, and lives to be reveng'd on thee, That wert the only cause of his exile. Gav. 'Tis true; and, but for reverence of these robes, Thou shouldst not plod one foot beyond this place. Bish. of Cov. I did no more than I was bound to do: And, Gaveston, unless thou be reclaim'd, As then I did incense the parliament, So will I now, and thou shalt back to France. Gav. Saving your reverence, you must pardon me. K. Edw. Throw off his golden mitre, rend his stole, And in the channel christen him anew. Kent. Ay, brother, lay not violent hands on him! For he'll complain unto the see of Rome. Gav. Let him complain unto the see of hell: I'll be reveng'd on him for my exile. K. Edw. No, spare his life, but seize upon his goods: Be thou lord bishop, and receive his rents, And make him serve thee as thy chaplain: I give him thee; here, use him as thou wilt. Gav. He shall to prison, and there die in bolts. K. Edw. Ay, to the Tower, the Fleet, or where thou wilt. Bish. of Cov. For this offence be thou accurs'd of God! K. Edw. Who's there? Convey this priest to the Tower. Bish. of Cov. True, true. K. Edw. But, in the meantime, Gaveston, away, And take possession of his house and goods. Come, follow me, and thou shalt have my guard To see it done, and bring thee safe again. Gav. What should a priest do with so fair a house? A prison may beseem his holiness. [Exeunt.

 Enter, on one side, the elder MORTIMER, and the younger
   MORTIMER; on the other, WARWICK, and LANCASTER.
War. 'Tis true, the bishop is in the Tower,
   And goods and body given to Gaveston.
Lan. What, will they tyrannise upon the church?
   Ah, wicked King! accursed Gaveston!
   This ground, which is corrupted with their steps,
   Shall be their timeless sepulchre or mine.
Y. Mor. Well, let that peevish Frenchman guard him sure;
   Unless his breast be sword-proof, he shall die.
E. Mor. How now! why droops the Earl of Lancaster?
Y. Mor. Wherefore is Guy of Warwick discontent?
Lan. That villain Gaveston is made an earl.
E. Mor. An earl!
War. Ay, and besides Lord-chamberlain of the realm,
   And Secretary too, and Lord of Man.
E. Mor. We may not nor we will not suffer this.
Y. Mor. Why post we not from hence to levy men?
Lan. "My Lord of Cornwall" now at every word;
   And happy is the man whom he vouchsafes,
   For vailing of his bonnet, one good look.
   Thus, arm in arm, the king and he doth march:
   Nay, more, the guard upon his lordship waits,
   And all the court begins to flatter him.
War. Thus leaning on the shoulder of the king,
   He nods, and scorns, and smiles at those that pass.
E. Mor. Doth no man take exceptions at the slave?
Lan. All stomach him, but none dare speak a word.
Y. Mor. Ah, that bewrays their baseness, Lancaster!
   Were all the earls and barons of my mind,
   We'd hale him from the bosom of the king,
   And at the court-gate hang the peasant up,
   Who, swoln with venom of ambitious pride,
   Will be the ruin of the realm and us.
War. Here comes my Lord of Canterbury's grace.
Lan. His countenance bewrays he is displeas'd.
    Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, and an
                     Attendant.
Archb. of Cant. First, were his sacred garments rent and torn;
   Then laid they violent hands upon him; next,
   Himself imprison'd, and his goods asseiz'd:
   This certify the Pope: away, take horse. [Exit Attendant.
Lan. My lord, will you take arms against the king?
Archb. of Cant. What need I? God himself is up in arms
   When violence is offer'd to the church.
Y. Mor. Then will you join with us, that be his peers,
   To banish or behead that Gaveston?
Archb. of Cant. What else, my lords? for it concerns me near;
   The bishoprick of Coventry is his.
Enter QUEEN ISABELLA.

Y. Mor. Madam, whither walks your majesty so fast?
Q. Isab. Unto the forest, gentle Mortimer,
   To live in grief and baleful discontent;
   For now my lord the king regards me not,
   But dotes upon the love of Gaveston:
   He claps his cheeks, and hangs about his neck,
   Smiles in his face, and whispers in his ears;
   And, when I come, he frowns, as who should say,
   "Go whither thou wilt, seeing I have Gaveston."
E. Mor. Is it not strange that he is thus bewitch'd?
Y. Mor. Madam, return unto the court again:
   That sly inveigling Frenchman we'll exile,
   Or lose our lives; and yet, ere that day come,
   The king shall lose his crown; for we have power,
   And courage too, to be reveng'd at full.
Archb. of Cant. But yet lift not your swords against the king.
Lan. No; but we will lift Gaveston from hence.
War. And war must be the means, or he'll stay still.
Q. Isab. Then let him stay; for, rather than my lord
   Shall be oppress'd with civil mutinies,
   I will endure a melancholy life,
   And let him frolic with his minion.
Archb. of Cant. My lords, to ease all this, but hear me speak:
   We and the rest, that are his counsellors,
   Will meet, and with a general consent
   Confirm his banishment with our hands and seals.
Lan. What we confirm the king will frustrate.
Y. Mor. Then may we lawfully revolt from him.
War. But say, my lord, where shall this meeting be?
Archb. of Cant. At the New Temple.
Y. Mor. Content.
Archb. of Cant. And, in the meantime, I'll entreat you all
   To cross to Lambeth, and there stay with me.
Lan. Come, then, let's away.
Y. Mor. Madam, farewell.
Q. Isab. Farewell, sweet Mortimer, and, for my sake,
   Forbear to levy arms against the king.
Y. Mor. Ay, if words will serve; if not, I must. [Exeunt.
Enter GAVESTON and KENT.

Gav. Edmund, the mighty prince of Lancaster,
   That hath more earldoms than an ass can bear,
   And both the Mortimers, two goodly men,
   With Guy of Warwick, that redoubted knight,
   Are gone towards Lambeth: there let them remain. [Exeunt.
Enter LANCASTER, WARWICK, PEMBROKE, the elder
    MORTIMER, the younger MORTIMER, the ARCHBISHOP
    OF CANTERBURY, and Attendants.
Lan. Here is the form of Gaveston's exile; May it please your lordship to subscribe your name. Archb. of Cant. Give me the paper. [He subscribes, as the others do after him. Lan. Quick, quick, my lord; I long to write my name. War. But I long more to see him banish'd hence. Y. Mor. The name of Mortimer shall fright the king, Unless he be declin'd from that base peasant.

Enter KING EDWARD, GAVESTON, and KENT.

K. Edw. What, are you mov'd that Gaveston sits here?
   It is our pleasure; we will have it so.
Lan. Your grace doth well to place him by your side,
   For nowhere else the new earl is so safe.
E. Mor. What man of noble birth can brook this sight?
   Quam male conveniunt!—
   See, what a scornful look the peasant casts!
Pem. Can kingly lions fawn on creeping ants?
War. Ignoble vassal, that, like Phaeton,
   Aspir'st unto the guidance of the sun!
Y. Mor. Their downfall is at hand, their forces down:
   We will not thus be fac'd and over-peer'd.
K. Edw. Lay hands on that traitor Mortimer!
E. Mor. Lay hands on that traitor Gaveston!
Kent. Is this the duty that you owe your king?
War. We know our duties; let him know his peers.
K. Edw. Whither will you bear him? stay, or ye shall die.
E. Mor. We are no traitors; therefore threaten not.
Gav. No, threaten not, my lord, but pay them home.
   Were I a king—
Y. Mor. Thou, villain! wherefore talk'st thou of a king,
   That hardly art a gentleman by birth?
K. Edw. Were he a peasant, being my minion,
   I'll make the proudest of you stoop to him.
Lan. My lord—you may not thus disparage us.—
   Away, I say, with hateful Gaveston!
E. Mor. And with the Earl of Kent that favours him.
                                   [Attendants remove Gaveston and Kent.
K. Edw. Nay, then, lay violent hands upon your king:
   Here, Mortimer, sit thou in Edward's throne;
   Warwick and Lancaster, wear you my crown.
   Was ever king thus over-rul'd as I?
Lan. Learn, then, to rule us better, and the realm.
Y. Mor. What we have done, our heart-blood shall maintain.
War. Think you that we can brook this upstart['s] pride?
K. Edw. Anger and wrathful fury stops my speech.
Archb. of Cant. Why are you not mov'd? be patient, my lord,
   And see what we your counsellors have done.
Y. Mor. My lords, now let us all be resolute,
   And either have our wills, or lose our lives.
K. Edw. Meet you for this, proud over-daring peers!
   Ere my sweet Gaveston shall part from me,
   This isle shall fleet upon the ocean,
   And wander to the unfrequented Inde.
Archb. of Cant. You know that I am legate to the Pope:
   On your allegiance to the see of Rome,
   Subscribe, as we have done, to his exile.
Y. Mor. Curse him, if he refuse; and then may we
   Depose him, and elect another king.
K. Edw. Ay, there it goes! but yet I will not yield:
   Curse me, depose me, do the worst you can.
Lan. Then linger not, my lord, but do it straight.
Archb. of Cant. Remember how the bishop was abus'd:
   Either banish him that was the cause thereof,
   Or I will presently discharge these lords
   Of duty and allegiance due to thee.
K. Edw. It boots me not to threat; I must speak fair:
   The legate of the Pope will be obey'd.— [Aside.
   My lord, you shall be Chancellor of the realm;
   Thou, Lancaster, High-Admiral of our fleet;
   Young Mortimer and his uncle shall be earls;
   And you, Lord Warwick, President of the North;
   And thou of Wales. If this content you not,
   Make several kingdoms of this monarchy,
   And share it equally amongst you all,
   So I may have some nook or corner left,
   To frolic with my dearest Gaveston.
Archb. of Cant. Nothing shall alter us; we are resolv'd.
Lan. Come, come, subscribe.
Y. Mor. Why should you love him whom the world hates so?
K. Edw. Because he loves me more than all the world.
   Ah, none but rude and savage-minded men
   Would seek the ruin of my Gaveston!
   You that be noble-born should pity him.
War. You that are princely-born should shake him off:
   For shame, subscribe, and let the lown depart.
E. Mor. Urge him, my lord.
Archb. of Cant. Are you content to banish him the realm?
K. Edw. I see I must, and therefore am content:
   Instead of ink, I'll write it with my tears. [Subscribes.
Y. Mor. The king is love-sick for his minion.
K. Edw. 'Tis done: and now, accursed hand, fall off!
Lan. Give it me: I'll have it publish'd in the streets.
Y. Mor. I'll see him presently despatch'd away.
Archb. of Cant. Now is my heart at ease.
War. And so is mine.
Pem. This will be good news to the common sort.
E. Mor. Be it or no, he shall not linger here.
                                        [Exeunt all except King Edward.
K. Edw. How fast they run to banish him I love!
   They would not stir, were it to do me good.
   Why should a king be subject to a priest?
   Proud Rome, that hatchest such imperial grooms,
   With these thy superstitious taper-lights,
   Wherewith thy antichristian churches blaze,
   I'll fire thy crazed buildings, and enforce
   The papal towers to kiss the lowly ground,
   With slaughter'd priests make Tiber's channel swell,
   And banks rais'd higher with their sepulchres!
   As for the peers, that back the clergy thus,
   If I be king, not one of them shall live.
Re-enter GAVESTON.

Gav. My lord, I hear it whisper'd everywhere,
   That I am banish'd and must fly the land.
K. Edw. 'Tis true, sweet Gaveston: O were it false!
   The legate of the Pope will have it so,
   And thou must hence, or I shall be depos'd.
   But I will reign to be reveng'd of them;
   And therefore, sweet friend, take it patiently.
   Live where thou wilt, I'll send thee gold enough;
   And long thou shalt not stay; or, if thou dost,
   I'll come to thee; my love shall ne'er decline.
Gav. Is all my hope turn'd to this hell of grief?
K. Edw. Rend not my heart with thy too-piercing words:
   Thou from this land, I from myself am banish'd.
Gav. To go from hence grieves not poor Gaveston;
   But to forsake you, in whose gracious looks
   The blessedness of Gaveston remains;
   For nowhere else seeks he felicity.
K. Edw. And only this torments my wretched soul,
   That, whether I will or no, thou must depart.
   Be governor of Ireland in my stead,
   And there abide till fortune call thee home.
   Here, take my picture, and let me wear thine:
                                               [They exchange pictures.
   O, might I keep thee here, as I do this,
   Happy were I! but now most miserable.
Gav. 'Tis something to be pitied of a king.
K. Edw. Thou shalt not hence; I'll hide thee, Gaveston.
Gav. I shall be found, and then 'twill grieve me more.
K. Edw. Kind words and mutual talk makes our grief greater:
   Therefore, with dumb embracement, let us part,
   Stay, Gaveston; I cannot leave thee thus.
Gav. For every look, my love drops down a tear:
   Seeing I must go, do not renew my sorrow.
K. Edw. The time is little that thou hast to stay,
   And, therefore, give me leave to look my fill.
   But, come, sweet friend; I'll bear thee on thy way.
Gav. The peers will frown.
K. Edw. I pass not for their anger. Come, let's go:
   O, that we might as well return as go!
Enter QUEEN ISABELLA.

Q. Isab. Whither goes my lord?
K. Edw. Fawn not on me, French strumpet; get thee gone!
Q. Isab. On whom but on my husband should I fawn?
Gav. On Mortimer; with whom, ungentle queen,—
   I judge no more—judge you the rest, my lord.
Q. Isab. In saying this, thou wrong'st me, Gaveston:
   Is't not enough that thou corrupt'st my lord,
   And art a bawd to his affections,
   But thou must call mine honour thus in question?
Gav. I mean not so; your grace must pardon me.
K. Edw. Thou art too familiar with that Mortimer,
   And by thy means is Gaveston exil'd:
   But I would wish thee reconcile the lords,
   Or thou shalt ne'er be reconcil'd to me.
Q. Isab. Your highness knows, it lies not in my power.
K. Edw. Away, then! touch me not.—Come, Gaveston.
Q. Isab. Villain, 'tis thou that robb'st me of my lord.
Gav. Madam, 'tis you that rob me of my lord.
K. Edw. Speak not unto her: let her droop and pine.
Q. Isab. Wherein, my lord, have I deserv'd these words?
   Witness the tears that Isabella sheds,
   Witness this heart, that, sighing for thee, breaks,
   How dear my lord is to poor Isabel!
K. Edw. And witness heaven how dear thou art to me:
   There weep; for, till my Gaveston be repeal'd,
   Assure thyself thou com'st not in my sight.
                                      [Exeunt King Edward and Gaveston.
Q. Isab. O miserable and distressed queen!
   Would, when I left sweet France, and was embarked,
   That charming Circe, walking on the waves,
   Had chang'd my shape! or at the marriage-day
   The cup of Hymen had been full of poison!
   Or with those arms, that twin'd about my neck,
   I had been stifled, and not liv'd to see
   The king my lord thus to abandon me!
   Like frantic Juno, will I fill the earth
   With ghastly murmur of my sighs and cries;
   For never doted Jove on Ganymede
   So much as he on cursed Gaveston:
   But that will more exasperate his wrath;
   I must entreat him, I must speak him fair,
   And be a means to call home Gaveston:
   And yet he'll ever dote on Gaveston;
   And so am I for ever miserable.
  Re-enter LANCASTER, WARWICK, PEMBROKE, the elder
       MORTIMER, and the younger MORTIMER.
Lan. Look, where the sister of the king of France
   Sits wringing of her hands and beats her breast!
War. The king, I fear, hath ill-treated her.
Pem. Hard is the heart that injures such a saint.
Y. Mor. I know 'tis 'long of Gaveston she weeps.
E. Mor. Why, he is gone.
Y. Mor. Madam, how fares your grace?
Q. Isab. Ah, Mortimer, now breaks the king's hate forth,
   And he confesseth that he loves me not!
Y. Mor. Cry quittance, madam, then, and love not him.
Q. Isab. No, rather will I die a thousand deaths:
   And yet I love in vain; he'll ne'er love me.
Lan. Fear ye not, madam; now his minion's gone,
   His wanton humour will be quickly left.
Q. Isab. O, never, Lancaster! I am enjoin'd,
   To sue unto you all for his repeal:
   This wills my lord, and this must I perform,
   Or else be banish'd from his highness' presence.
Lan. For his repeal, madam! he comes not back,
   Unless the sea cast up his shipwreck'd body.
War. And to behold so sweet a sight as that,
   There's none here but would run his horse to death.
Y. Mor. But, madam, would you have us call him home?
Q. Isab. Ay, Mortimer, for, till he be restor'd,
   The angry king hath banish'd me the court;
   And, therefore, as thou lov'st and tender'st me,
   Be thou my advocate unto these peers.
Y. Mor. What, would you have me plead for Gaveston?
E. Mor. Plead for him that will, I am resolv'd.
Lan. And so am I, my lord: dissuade the queen.
Q. Isab. O, Lancaster, let him dissuade the king!
   For 'tis against my will he should return.
War. Then speak not for him; let the peasant go.
Q. Isab. 'Tis for myself I speak, and not for him.
Pem. No speaking will prevail; and therefore cease.
Y. Mor. Fair queen, forbear to angle for the fish
   Which, being caught, strikes him that takes it dead;
   I mean that vile torpedo, Gaveston,
   That now, I hope, floats on the Irish seas.
Q. Isab. Sweet Mortimer, sit down by me a while,
   And I will tell thee reasons of such weight
   As thou wilt soon subscribe to his repeal.
Y. Mor. It is impossible: but speak your mind.
Q. Isab. Then, thus;—but none shall hear it but ourselves.
                                               [Talks to Y. Mor. apart.
Lan. My lords, albeit the queen win Mortimer,
   Will you be resolute and hold with me?
E. Mor. Not I, against my nephew.
Pem. Fear not; the queen's words cannot alter him.
War. No? do but mark how earnestly she pleads!
Lan. And see how coldly his looks make denial!
War. She smiles: now, for my life, his mind is chang'd!
Lan. I'll rather lose his friendship, I, than grant.
Y. Mor. Well, of necessity it must be so.—
   My lords, that I abhor base Gaveston
   I hope your honours make no question.
   And therefore, though I plead for his repeal,
   'Tis not for his sake, but to our avail;
   Nay, for the realm's behoof, and for the king's.
Lan. Fie, Mortimer, dishonour not thyself!
   Can this be true, 'twas good to banish him?
   And is this true, to call him home again?
   Such reasons make white black, and dark night day.
Y. Mor. My Lord of Lancaster, mark the respect.
Lan. In no respect can contraries be true.
Q. Isab. Yet, good my lord, hear what he can allege.
War. All that he speaks is nothing; we are resolv'd.
Y. Mor. Do you not wish that Gaveston were dead?
Pem. I would he were!
Y. Mor. Why, then, my lord, give me but leave to speak.
E. Mor. But, nephew, do not play the sophister.
Y. Mor. This which I urge is of a burning zeal
   To mend the king and do our country good.
   Know you not Gaveston hath store of gold,
   Which may in Ireland purchase him such friends
   As he will front the mightiest of us all?
   And whereas he shall live and be belov'd,
   'Tis hard for us to work his overthrow.
War. Mark you but that, my lord of Lancaster.
Y. Mor. But, were he here, detested as he is,
   How easily might some base slave be suborn'd
   To greet his lordship with a poniard,
   And none so much as blame the murderer,
   But rather praise him for that brave attempt,
   And in the chronicle enrol his name
   For purging of the realm of such a plague!
Pem. He saith true.
Lan. Ay, but how chance this was not done before?
Y. Mor. Because, my lords, it was not thought upon.
   Nay, more, when he shall know it lies in us
   To banish him, and then to call him home,
   'Twill make him vail the top flag of his pride,
   And fear to offend the meanest nobleman.
E. Mor. But how if he do not, nephew?
Y. Mor. Then may we with some colour rise in arms;
   For, howsoever we have borne it out,
   'Tis treason to be up against the king;
   So shall we have the people of our side,
   Which, for his father's sake, lean to the king,
   But cannot brook a night-grown mushroom,
   Such a one as my Lord of Cornwall is,
   Should bear us down of the nobility:
   And, when the commons and the nobles join,
   'Tis not the king can buckler Gaveston;
   We'll pull him from the strongest hold he hath.
   My lords, if to perform this I be slack,
   Think me as base a groom as Gaveston.
Lan. On that condition Lancaster will grant.
War. And so will Pembroke and I.
E. Mor. And I.
Y. Mor. In this I count me highly gratified,
   And Mortimer will rest at your command.
Q. Isab. And when this favour Isabel forgets,
   Then let her live abandon'd and forlorn.—
   But see, in happy time, my lord the king,
   Having brought the Earl of Cornwall on his way,
   Is new return'd. This news will glad him much:
   Yet not so much as me; I love him more
   Than he can Gaveston: would he lov'd me
   But half so much! then were I treble-blest.
Re-enter KING EDWARD, mourning.

K. Edw. He's gone, and for his absence thus I mourn:
   Did never sorrow go so near my heart
   As doth the want of my sweet Gaveston;
   And, could my crown's revenue bring him back,
   I would freely give it to his enemies,
   And think I gain'd, having bought so dear a friend.
Q. Isab. Hark, how he harps upon his minion!
K. Edw. My heart is as an anvil unto sorrow,
   Which beats upon it like the Cyclops' hammers,
   And with the noise turns up my giddy brain,
   And makes me frantic for my Gaveston.
   Ah, had some bloodless Fury rose from hell,
   And with my kingly sceptre struck me dead,
   When I was forc'd to leave my Gaveston!
Lan. Diablo, what passions call you these?
Q. Isab. My gracious lord, I come to bring you news.
K. Edw. That you have parled with your Mortimer?
Q. Isab. That Gaveston, my lord, shall be repeal'd.
K. Edw. Repeal'd! the news is too sweet to be true.
Q. Isab. But will you love me, if you find it so?
K. Edw. If it be so, what will not Edward do?
Q. Isab. For Gaveston, but not for Isabel.
K. Edw. For thee, fair queen, if thou lov'st Gaveston;
   I'll hang a golden tongue about thy neck,
   Seeing thou hast pleaded with so good success.
Q. Isab. No other jewels hang about my neck
   Than these, my lord; nor let me have more wealth
   Than I may fetch from this rich treasury.
   O, how a kiss revives poor Isabel!
K. Edw. Once more receive my hand; and let this be
   A second marriage 'twixt thyself and me.
Q. Isab. And may it prove more happy than the first!
   My gentle lord, bespeak these nobles fair,
   That wait attendance for a gracious look,
   And on their knees salute your majesty.
K. Edw. Courageous Lancaster, embrace thy king;
   And, as gross vapours perish by the sun,
   Even so let hatred with thy sovereign's smile:
   Live thou with me as my companion.
Lan. This salutation overjoys my heart.
K. Edw. Warwick shall be my chiefest counsellor:
   These silver hairs will more adorn my court
   Than gaudy silks or rich embroidery.
   Chide me, sweet Warwick, if I go astray.
War. Slay me, my lord, when I offend your grace.
K. Edw. In solemn triumphs and in public shows
   Pembroke shall bear the sword before the king.
Pem. And with this sword Pembroke will fight for you.
K. Edw. But wherefore walks young Mortimer aside?
   Be thou commander of our royal fleet;
   Or, if that lofty office like thee not,
   I make thee here Lord Marshal of the realm.
Y. Mor. My lord, I'll marshal so your enemies,
   As England shall be quiet, and you safe.
K. Edw. And as for you, Lord Mortimer of Chirke,
   Whose great achievements in our foreign war
   Deserve no common place nor mean reward,
   Be you the general of the levied troops
   That now are ready to assail the Scots.
E. Mor. In this your grace hath highly honour'd me,
   For with my nature war doth best agree.
Q. Isab. Now is the king of England rich and strong,
   Having the love of his renowmed peers.
K. Edw. Ay, Isabel, ne'er was my heart so light.—
   Clerk of the crown, direct our warrant forth,
   For Gaveston, to Ireland!
Enter BEAUMONT with warrant.

                               Beaumont, fly
   As fast as Iris or Jove's Mercury.
Beau. It shall be done, my gracious lord. [Exit.
K. Edw. Lord Mortimer, we leave you to your charge.
   Now let us in, and feast it royally.
   Against our friend the Earl of Cornwall comes
   We'll have a general tilt and tournament;
   And then his marriage shall be solemnis'd;
   For wot you not that I have made him sure
   Unto our cousin, the Earl of Glocester's heir?
Lan. Such news we hear, my lord.
K. Edw. That day, if not for him, yet for my sake,
   Who in the triumph will be challenger,
   Spare for no cost; we will requite your love.
War. In this or aught your highness shall command us.
K. Edw. Thanks, gentle Warwick. Come, lets in and revel.
                           [Exeunt all except the elder Mortimer and the
                              younger Mortimer.
E. Mor. Nephew, I must to Scotland; thou stay'st here.
   Leave now to oppose thyself against the king:
   Thou seest by nature he is mild and calm;
   And, seeing his mind so dotes on Gaveston,
   Let him without controlment have his will.
   The mightiest kings have had their minions;
   Great Alexander lov'd Hephæstion,
   The conquering Hercules for Hylas wept,
   And for Patroclus stern Achilles droop'd
   And not kings only, but the wisest men;
   The Roman Tully lov'd Octavius,
   Grave Socrates wild Alcibiades.
   Then let his grace, whose youth is flexible,
   And promiseth as much as we can wish,
   Freely enjoy that vain light-headed earl;
   For riper years will wean him from such toys.
Y. Mor. Uncle, his wanton humour grieves not me;
   But this I scorn, that one so basely-born
   Should by his sovereign's favour grow so pert,
   And riot it with the treasure of the realm,
   While soldiers mutiny for want of pay.
   He wears a lord's revenue on his back,
   And, Midas-like, he jets it in the court,
   With base outlandish cullions at his heels,
   Whose proud fantastic liveries make such show
   As if that Proteus, god of shapes, appear'd.
   I have not seen a dapper Jack so brisk:
   He wears a short Italian hooded cloak,
   Larded with pearl, and in his Tuscan cap
   A jewel of more value than the crown.
   While others walk below, the king and he,
   From out a window, laugh at such as we,
   And flout our train, and jest at our attire.
   Uncle, 'tis this that makes me impatient.
E. Mor. But, nephew, now you see the king is chang'd.
Y. Mor. Then so I am, and live to do him service:
   But, whiles I have a sword, a hand, a heart,
   I will not yield to any such upstart.
   You know my mind: come, uncle, let's away. [Exeunt.
Enter the younger SPENSER and BALDOCK.

Bald. Spenser,
   Seeing that our lord the Earl of Glocester's dead,
   Which of the nobles dost thou mean to serve?
Y. Spen. Not Mortimer, nor any of his side,
   Because the king and he are enemies.
   Baldock, learn this of me: a factious lord
   Shall hardly do himself good, much less us;
   But he that hath the favour of a king
   May with one word advance us while we live.
   The liberal Earl of Cornwall is the man
   On whose good fortune Spenser's hope depends.
Bald. What, mean you, then, to be his follower?
Y. Spen. No, his companion; for he loves me well,
   And would have once preferr'd me to the king.
Bald. But he is banish'd; there's small hope of him.
Y. Spen. Ay, for a while; but, Baldock, mark the end.
   A friend of mine told me in secrecy
   That he's repeal'd and sent for back again;
   And even now a post came from the court
   With letters to our lady from the king;
   And, as she read, she smil'd; which makes me think
   It is about her lover Gaveston.
Bald. 'Tis like enough; for, since he was exil'd,
   She neither walks abroad nor comes in sight.
   But I had thought the match had been broke off,
   And that his banishment had chang'd her mind.
Y. Spen. Our lady's first love is not wavering;
   My life for thine, she will have Gaveston.
Bald. Then hope I by her means to be preferr'd,
   Having read unto her since she was a child.
Y. Spen. Then, Baldock, you must cast the scholar off,
   And learn to court it like a gentleman.
   'Tis not a black coat and a little band,
   A velvet-cap'd cloak, fac'd before with serge,
   And smelling to a nosegay all the day,
   Or holding of a napkin in your hand,
   Or saying a long grace at a table's end,
   Or making low legs to a nobleman,
   Or looking downward, with your eye-lids close,
   And saying, "Truly, an't may please your honour,"
   Can get you any favour with great men:
   You must be proud, bold, pleasant, resolute,
   And now and then stab, as occasion serves.
Bald. Spenser, thou know'st I hate such formal toys,
   And use them but of mere hypocrisy.
   Mine old lord, whiles he liv'd, was so precise,
   That he would take exceptions at my buttons,
   And, being like pins' heads, blame me for the bigness;
   Which made me curate-like in mine attire,
   Though inwardly licentious enough,
   And apt for any kind of villany.
   I am none of these common pedants, I,
   That cannot speak without propterea quod.
Y. Spen. But one of those that saith quando-quidem,
   And hath a special gift to form a verb.
Bald. Leave off this jesting; here my lady comes.
Enter KING EDWARD'S Niece.

Niece. The grief for his exile was not so much
   As is the joy of his returning home.
   This letter came from my sweet Gaveston:
   What need'st thou, love, thus to excuse thyself?
   I know thou couldst not come and visit me. [Reads.
   I will not long be from thee, though I die;—
   This argues the entire love of my lord;— [Reads.
   When I forsake thee, death seize on my heart!—
   But stay thee here where Gaveston shall sleep.
                                       [Puts the letter into her bosom.
   Now to the letter of my lord the king:
   He wills me to repair unto the court,
   And meet my Gaveston: why do I stay,
   Seeing that he talks thus of my marriage day?—
   Who's there? Baldock!
   See that my coach be ready; I must hence.
Bald. It shall be done, madam.
Niece. And meet me at the park-pale presently [Exit Baldock.
   Spenser, stay you, and bear me company,
   For I have joyful news to tell thee of;
   My lord of Cornwall is a-coming over,
   And will be at the court as soon as we.
Y. Spen. I knew the king would have him home again.
Niece. If all things sort out, as I hope they will,
   Thy service, Spenser, shall be thought upon.
Y. Spen. I humbly thank your ladyship.
Niece. Come, lead the way: I long till I am there. [Exeunt.
Enter KING EDWARD, QUEEN ISABELLA, KENT, LANCASTER,
     the younger MORTIMER, WARWICK, PEMBROKE, and
     Attendants.
K. Edw. The wind is good; I wonder why he stays:
   I fear me he is wreck'd upon the sea.
Q. Isab. Look, Lancaster, how passionate he is,
   And still his mind runs on his minion!
Lan. My lord,—
K. Edw. How now! what news? is Gaveston arriv'd?
Y. Mor. Nothing but Gaveston! what means your grace?
   You have matters of more weight to think upon:
   The King of France sets foot in Normandy.
K. Edw. A trifle! we'll expel him when we please.
   But tell me, Mortimer, what's thy device
   Against the stately triumph we decreed?
Y. Mor. A homely one, my lord, not worth the telling.
K. Edw. Pray thee, let me know it.
Y. Mor. But, seeing you are so desirous, thus it is;
   A lofty cedar tree, fair flourishing,
   On whose top branches kingly eagles perch,
   And by the bark a canker creeps me up,
   And gets unto the highest bough of all;
   The motto, Æque tandem.
K. Edw. And what is yours, my Lord of Lancaster?
Lan. My lord, mine's more obscure than Mortimer's.
   Pliny reports, there is a flying-fish
   Which all the other fishes deadly hate,
   And therefore, being pursu'd, it takes the air:
   No sooner is it up, but there's a fowl
   That seizeth it: this fish, my lord, I bear;
   The motto this, Undique mors est.
Kent. Proud Mortimer! ungentle Lancaster!
   Is this the love you bear your sovereign?
   Is this the fruit your reconcilement bears?
   Can you in words make show of amity,
   And in your shields display your rancorous minds?
   What call you this but private libelling
   Against the Earl of Cornwall and my brother?
Q. Isab. Sweet husband, be content; they all love you.
K. Edw. They love me not that hate my Gaveston.
   I am that cedar; shake me not too much;
   And you the eagles; soar ye ne'er so high,
   I have the jesses that will pull you down;
   And Æque tandem shall that canker cry
   Unto the proudest peer of Britainy.
   Thou that compar'st him to a flying-fish,
   And threaten'st death whether he rise or fall,
   'Tis not the hugest monster of the sea,
   Nor foulest harpy, that shall swallow him.
Y. Mor. If in his absence thus he favours him,
   What will he do whenas he shall be present?
Lan. That shall we see: look, where his lordship come!
Enter GAVESTON.

K. Edw. My Gaveston! Welcome to Tynmouth! welcome to thy friend! Thy absence made me droop and pine away; For, as the lovers of fair Danaë, When she was lock'd up in a brazen tower, Desir'd her more, and wax'd outrageous, So did it fare with me: and now thy sight Is sweeter far than was thy parting hence Bitter and irksome to my sobbing heart. Gav. Sweet lord and king, your speech preventeth mine; Yet have I words left to express my joy: The shepherd, nipt with biting winter's rage, Frolics not more to see the painted spring Than I do to behold your majesty. K. Edw. Will none of you salute my Gaveston? Lan. Salute him! yes.—Welcome, Lord Chamberlain! Y. Mor. Welcome is the good Earl of Cornwall! War. Welcome, Lord Governor of the Isle of Man! Pem. Welcome, Master Secretary! Kent. Brother, do you hear them? K. Edw. Still will these earls and barons use me thus? Gav. My lord, I cannot brook these injuries. Q. Isab. Ay me, poor soul, when these begin to jar! [Aside. K. Edw. Return it to their throats; I'll be thy warrant. Gav. Base, leaden earls, that glory in your birth, Go sit at home, and eat your tenants' beef; And come not here to scoff at Gaveston, Whose mounting thoughts did never creep so low As to bestow a look on such as you. Lan. Yet I disdain not to do this for you. [Draws his sword, and offers to stab Gaveston. K. Edw. Treason! treason! where's the traitor? Pem. Here, here! K. Edw. Convey hence Gaveston; they'll murder him. Gav. The life of thee shall salve this foul disgrace. Y. Mor. Villain, thy life! unless I miss mine aim. [Wounds Gaveston. Q. Isab. Ah, furious Mortimer, what hast thou done. Y. Mor. No more than I would answer, were he slain. [Exit Gaveston with Attendants. K. Edw. Yes, more than thou canst answer, though he live: Dear shall you both abide this riotous deed: Out of my presence! come not near the court. Y. Mor. I'll not be barr'd the court for Gaveston. Lan. We'll hale him by the ears unto the block. K. Edw. Look to your own heads; his is sure enough. War. Look to your own crown, if you back him thus. Kent. Warwick, these words do ill beseem thy years. K. Edw. Nay, all of them conspire to cross me thus: But, if I live, I'll tread upon their heads That think with high looks thus to tread me down. Come, Edmund, let's away, and levy men: 'Tis war that must abate these barons' pride. [Exeunt King Edward, Queen Isabella, and Kent. War. Let's to our castles, for the king is mov'd. Y. Mor. Mov'd may he be, and perish in his wrath! Lan. Cousin, it is no dealing with him now; He means to make us stoop by force of arms: And therefore let us jointly here protest To prosecute that Gaveston to the death. Y. Mor. By heaven, the abject villain shall not live! War. I'll have his blood, or die in seeking it. Pem. The like oath Pembroke takes. Lan. And so doth Lancaster. Now send our heralds to defy the king; And make the people swear to put him down.

Enter a Messenger.

Y. Mor. Letters! from whence? Mes. From Scotland, my lord. [Giving letters to Mortimer. Lan. Why, how now, cousin! how fare all our friends? Y. Mor. My uncle's taken prisoner by the Scots. Lan. We'll have him ransom'd, man: be of good cheer. Y. Mor. They rate his ransom at five thousand pound. Who should defray the money but the king, Seeing he is taken prisoner in his wars? I'll to the king. Lan. Do, cousin, and I'll bear thee company. War. Meantime my Lord of Pembroke and myself Will to Newcastle here, and gather head. Y. Mor. About it, then, and we will follow you. Lan. Be resolute and full of secrecy. War. I warrant you. [Exit with Pembroke. Y. Mor. Cousin, an if he will not ransom him, I'll thunder such a peal into his ears As never subject did unto his king. Lan. Content; I'll bear my part.—Hollo! who's there?

Enter Guard.

Y. Mor. Ay, marry, such a guard as this doth well. Lan. Lead on the way. Guard. Whither will your lordships? Y. Mor. Whither else but to the king? Guard. His highness is dispos'd to be alone. Lan. Why, so he may; but we will speak to him. Guard. You may not in, my lord. Y. Mor. May we not?

Enter KING EDWARD and KENT.

K. Edw. How now!
   What noise is this? who have we here? is't you? [Going.
Y. Mor. Nay, stay, my lord; I come to bring you news;
   Mine uncle's taken prisoner by the Scots.
K. Edw. Then ransom him.
Lan. 'Twas in your wars; you should ransom him.
Y. Mor. And you will ransom him, or else—
Kent. What, Mortimer, you will not threaten him?
K. Edw. Quiet yourself; you shall have the broad seal,
   To gather for him th[o]roughout the realm.
Lan. Your minion Gaveston hath taught you this.
Y. Mor. My lord, the family of the Mortimers
   Are not so poor, but, would they sell their land,
   'Twould levy men enough to anger you.
   We never beg, but use such prayers as these.
K. Edw. Shall I still be haunted thus?
Y. Mor. Nay, now you are here alone, I'll speak my mind.
Lan. And so will I; and then, my lord, farewell.
Y. Mor. The idle triumphs, masks, lascivious shows,
   And prodigal gifts bestow'd on Gaveston,
   Have drawn thy treasury dry, and made thee weak;
   The murmuring commons, overstretched, break.
Lan. Look for rebellion, look to be depos'd:
   Thy garrisons are beaten out of France,
   And, lame and poor, lie groaning at the gates;
   The wild Oneil, with swarms of Irish kerns,
   Lives uncontroll'd within the English pale;
   Unto the walls of York the Scots make road,
   And, unresisted, drive away rich spoils.
Y. Mor. The haughty Dane commands the narrow seas,
   While in the harbour ride thy ships unrigg'd.
Lan. What foreign prince sends thee ambassadors?
Y. Mor. Who loves thee, but a sort of flatterers?
Lan. Thy gentle queen, sole sister to Valois,
   Complains that thou hast left her all forlorn.
Y. Mor. Thy court is naked, being bereft of those
   That make a king seem glorious to the world,
   I mean the peers, whom thou shouldst dearly love;
   Libels are cast against thee in the street;
   Ballads and rhymes made of thy overthrow.
Lan. The northern borderers, seeing their houses burnt,
   Their wives and children slain, run up and down,
   Cursing the name of thee and Gaveston.
Y. Mor. When wert thou in the field with banner spread,
   But once? and then thy soldiers march'd like players,
   With garish robes, not armour; and thyself,
   Bedaub'd with gold, rode laughing at the rest,
   Nodding and shaking of thy spangled crest,
   Where women's favours hung like labels down.
Lan. And thereof came it that the fleering Scots,
   To England's high disgrace, have made this jig;
   Maids of England, sore may you mourn,
   For your lemans you have lost at Bannocksbourn,—
   With a heave and a ho!
   What weeneth the king of England
   So soon to have won Scotland!—
   With a rombelow!
Y. Mor. Wigmore shall fly, to set my uncle free.
Lan. And, when 'tis gone, our swords shall purchase more.
   If you be mov'd, revenge it as you can:
   Look next to see us with our ensigns spread. [Exit with Y. Mortimer.
K. Edw. My swelling heart for very anger breaks:
   How oft have I been baited by these peers,
   And dare not be reveng'd, for their power is great!
   Yet, shall the crowning of these cockerels
   Affright a lion? Edward, unfold thy paws,
   And let their lives'-blood slake thy fury's hunger.
   If I be cruel and grow tyrannous,
   Now let them thank themselves, and rue too late.
Kent. My lord, I see your love to Gaveston
   Will be the ruin of the realm and you,
   For now the wrathful nobles threaten wars;
   And therefore, brother, banish him for ever.
K. Edw. Art thou an enemy to my Gaveston?
Kent. Ay; and it grieves me that I favour'd him.
K. Edw. Traitor, be gone! whine thou with Mortimer.
Kent. So will I, rather than with Gaveston.
K. Edw. Out of my sight, and trouble me no more!
Kent. No marvel though thou scorn thy noble peers,
   When I thy brother am rejected thus.
K. Edw. Away! [Exit Kent.
   Poor Gaveston, thou hast no friend but me!
   Do what they can, we'll live in Tynmouth here;
   And, so I walk with him about the walls,
   What care I though the earls begirt us round?
   Here comes she that is cause of all these jars.
Enter QUEEN ISABELLA, with EDWARD'S NIECE, two Ladies,
       GAVESTON, BALDOCK, and the younger SPENSER.
Q. Isab. My lord, 'tis thought the earls are up in arms. K. Edw. Ay, and 'tis likewise thought you favour 'em. Q. Isab. Thus do you still suspect me without cause. Niece. Sweet uncle, speak more kindly to the queen. Gav. My lord, dissemble with her; speak her fair. K. Edw. Pardon me, sweet; I forgot myself. Q. Isab. Your pardon is quickly got of Isabel. K. Edw. The younger Mortimer is grown so brave, That to my face he threatens civil wars. Gav. Why do you not commit him to the Tower? K. Edw. I dare not, for the people love him well. Gav. Why, then, we'll have him privily made away. K. Edw. Would Lancaster and he had both carous'd A bowl of poison to each other's health! But let them go, and tell me what are these. Niece. Two of my father's servants whilst he liv'd: May't please your grace to entertain them now. K. Edw. Tell me, where wast thou born? what is thine arms? Bald. My name is Baldock, and my gentry I fetch from Oxford, not from heraldry. K. Edw. The fitter art thou, Baldock, for my turn. Wait on me, and I'll see thou shalt not want. Bald. I humbly thank your majesty. K. Edw. Knowest thou him, Gaveston. Gav. Ay, my lord; His name is Spenser; he is well allied: For my sake let him wait upon your grace; Scarce shall you find a man of more desert. K. Edw. Then, Spenser, wait upon me for his sake: I'll grace thee with a higher style ere long. Y. Spen. No greater titles happen unto me Than to be favour'd of your majesty! K. Edw. Cousin, this day shall be your marriage feast:— And, Gaveston, think that I love thee well, To wed thee to our niece, the only heir Unto the Earl of Glocester late deceas'd. Gav. I know, my lord, many will stomach me; But I respect neither their love nor hate. K. Edw. The headstrong barons shall not limit me; He that I list to favour shall be great. Come, let's away; and, when the marriage ends, Have at the rebels and their complices! [Exeunt.

      Enter KENT, LANCASTER, the younger MORTIMER,
              WARWICK, PEMBROKE, and others.
Kent. My lords, of love to this our native land,
   I come to join with you, and leave the king;
   And in your quarrel, and the realm's behoof,
   Will be the first that shall adventure life.
Lan. I fear me, you are sent of policy,
   To undermine us with a show of love.
War. He is your brother; therefore have we cause
   To cast the worst, and doubt of your revolt.
Kent. Mine honour shall be hostage of my truth:
   If that will not suffice, farewell, my lords.
Y. Mor. Stay, Edmund: never was Plantagenet
   False of his word; and therefore trust we thee.
Pem. But what's the reason you should leave him now?
Kent. I have inform'd the Earl of Lancaster.
Lan. And it sufficeth. Now, my lords, know this,
   That Gaveston is secretly arriv'd,
   And here in Tynmouth frolics with the king.
   Let us with these our followers scale the walls,
   And suddenly surprise them unawares.
Y. Mor. I'll give the onset.
War. And I'll follow thee.
Y. Mor. This tatter'd ensign of my ancestors,
   Which swept the desert shore of that Dead Sea
   Whereof we got the name of Mortimer,
   Will I advance upon this castle ['s] walls—
   Drums, strike alarum, raise them from their sport,
   And ring aloud the knell of Gaveston!
Lan. None be so hardy as to touch the king;
   But neither spare you Gaveston nor his friends. [Exeunt.
   Enter, severally KING EDWARD and the younger
                        SPENSER.
K. Edw. O, tell me, Spenser, where is Gaveston? Y. Spen. I fear me he is slain, my gracious lord. K. Edw. No, here he comes; now let them spoil and kill.

     Enter QUEEN ISABELLA, KING EDWARD'S Niece,
                GAVESTON, and Nobles.
   Fly, fly, my lords; the earls have got the hold;
   Take shipping, and away to Scarborough:
   Spenser and I will post away by land.
Gav. O, stay, my lord! they will not injure you.
K. Edw. I will not trust them. Gaveston, away!
Gav. Farewell, my lord.
K. Edw. Lady, farewell.
Niece. Farewell, sweet uncle, till we meet again.
K. Edw. Farewell, sweet Gaveston; and farewell, niece.
Q. Isab. No farewell to poor Isabel thy queen?
K. Edw. Yes, yes, for Mortimer your lover's sake.
Q. Isab. Heavens can witness, I love none but you.
                                     [Exeunt all except Queen Isabella.
   From my embracements thus he breaks away.
   O, that mine arms could close this isle about,
   That I might pull him to me where I would!
   Or that these tears, that drizzle from mine eyes,
   Had power to mollify his stony heart,
   That, when I had him, we might never part!
Enter LANCASTER, WARWICK, the younger MORTIMER, and
                 others. Alarums within.
Lan. I wonder how he scap'd.
Y. Mor. Who's this? the queen!
Q. Isab. Ay, Mortimer, the miserable queen,
   Whose pining heart her inward sighs have blasted,
   And body with continual mourning wasted:
   These hands are tir'd with haling of my lord
   From Gaveston, from wicked Gaveston;
   And all in vain; for, when I speak him fair,
   He turns away, and smiles upon his minion.
Y. Mor. Cease to lament, and tell us where's the king?
Q. Isab. What would you with the king? is't him you seek?
Lan. No, madam, but that cursed Gaveston:
   Far be it from the thought of Lancaster
   To offer violence to his sovereign!
   We would but rid the realm of Gaveston:
   Tell us where he remains, and he shall die.
Q. Isab. He's gone by water unto Scarborough:
   Pursue him quickly, and he cannot scape;
   The king hath left him, and his train is small.
War. Forslow no time, sweet Lancaster; let's march.
Y. Mor. How comes it that the king and he is parted?
Q. Isab. That thus your army, going several ways,
   Might be of lesser force, and with the power
   That he intendeth presently to raise,
   Be easily suppress'd: therefore be gone.
Y. Mor. Here in the river rides a Flemish hoy:
   Let's all aboard, and follow him amain.
Lan. The wind that bears him hence will fill our sails;
   Come, come, aboard! 'tis but an hour's sailing.
Y. Mor. Madam, stay you within this castle here.
Q. Isab. No, Mortimer; I'll to my lord the king.
Y. Mor. Nay, rather sail with us to Scarborough.
Q. Isab. You know the king is so suspicious
   As, if he hear I have but talk'd with you,
   Mine honour will be call'd in question;
   And therefore, gentle Mortimer, be gone.
Y. Mor. Madam, I cannot stay to answer you:
   But think of Mortimer as he deserves.
                                     [Exeunt all except Queen Isabella.
Q. Isab. So well hast thou deserv'd, sweet Mortimer,
   As Isabel could live with thee for ever.
   In vain I look for love at Edward's hand,
   Whose eyes are fix'd on none but Gaveston.
   Yet once more I'll importune him with prayer:
   If he be strange, and not regard my words,
   My son and I will over into France,
   And to the king my brother there complain
   How Gaveston hath robb'd me of his love:
   But yet, I hope, my sorrows will have end,
   And Gaveston this blessed day be slain. [Exit.
Enter GAVESTON, pursued.

Gav. Yet, lusty lords, I have escap'd your hands,
   Your threats, your 'larums, and your hot pursuits;
   And, though divorced from King Edward's eyes,
   Yet liveth Pierce of Gaveston unsurpris'd,
   Breathing in hope (malgrado all your beards,
   That muster rebels thus against your king)
   To see his royal sovereign once again.
Enter WARWICK, LANCASTER, PEMBROKE, the younger
     MORTIMER, Soldiers, JAMES and other Attendants of
     PENBROKE.
War. Upon him, soldiers! take away his weapons!
Y. Mor. Thou proud disturber of thy country's peace,
   Corrupter of thy king, cause of these broils,
   Base flatterer, yield! and, were it not for shame,
   Shame and dishonour to a soldier's name,
   Upon my weapon's point here shouldst thou fall,
   And welter in thy gore.
Lan. Monster of men,
   That, like the Greekish strumpet, train'd to arms
   And bloody wars so many valiant knights,
   Look for no other fortune, wretch, than death!
   King Edward is not here to buckler thee.
War. Lancaster, why talk'st thou to the slave?—
   Go, soldiers, take him hence; for, by my sword,
   His head shall off.—Gaveston, short warning
   Shall serve thy turn: it is our country's cause
   That here severely we will execute
   Upon thy person.—Hang him at a bough.
Gav. My lord,—
War. Soldiers, have him away.—
   But, for thou wert the favourite of a king,
   Thou shalt have so much honour at our hands.
Gav. I thank you all, my lords: then I perceive
   That heading is one, and hanging is the other,
   And death is all.
Enter ARUNDEL.

Lan. How now, my Lord of Arundel!
Arun. My lords, King Edward greets you all by me.
War. Arundel, say your message.
Arun. His majesty, hearing that you had taken Gaveston,
   Entreateth you by me, yet but he may
   See him before he dies; for why, he says,
   And sends you word, he knows that die he shall;
   And, if you gratify his grace so far,
   He will be mindful of the courtesy.
War. How now!
Gav. Renowmed Edward, how thy name
   Revives poor Gaveston!
War. No, it needeth not:
   Arundel, we will gratify the king
   In other matters; he must pardon us in this.—
   Soldiers, away with him!
Gav. Why, my Lord of Warwick,
   Will now these short delays beget my hopes?
   I know it, lords, it is life you aim at,
   Yet grant King Edward this.
Y. Mor. Shalt thou appoint
   What we shall grant?—Soldiers, away with him!—
   Thus we'll gratify the king;
   We'll send his head by thee; let him bestow
   His tears on that, for that is all he gets
   Of Gaveston, or else his senseless trunk.
Lan. Not so, my lord, lest he bestow more cost
   In burying him than he hath ever earn'd.
Arun. My lords, it is his majesty's request,
   And in the honour of a king he swears,
   He will but talk with him, and send him back.
War. When, can you tell? Arundel, no; we wot
   He that the care of his realm remits,
   And drives his nobles to these exigents
   For Gaveston, will, if he seize him once,
   Violate any promise to possess him.
Arun. Then, if you will not trust his grace in keep,
   My lords, I will be pledge for his return.
Y. Mor. 'Tis honourable in thee to offer this;
   But, for we know thou art a noble gentleman,
   We will not wrong thee so,
   To make away a true man for a thief.
Gav. How mean'st thou, Mortimer? that is over-base.
Y. Mor. Away, base groom, robber of king's renown!
   Question with thy companions and mates.
Pem. My Lord Mortimer, and you, my lords, each one,
   To gratify the king's request therein,
   Touching the sending of this Gaveston,
   Because his majesty so earnestly
   Desires to see the man before his death,
   I will upon mine honour undertake
   To carry him, and bring him back again;
   Provided this, that you, my Lord of Arundel,
   Will join with me.
War. Pembroke, what wilt thou do?
   Cause yet more bloodshed? is it not enough
   That we have taken him, but must we now
   Leave him on "Had I wist," and let him go?
Pem. My lords, I will not over-woo your honours:
   But, if you dare trust Pembroke with the prisoner,
   Upon mine oath, I will return him back.
Arun. My Lord of Lancaster, what say you in this?
Lan. Why, I say, let him go on Pembroke's word.
Pem. And you, Lord Mortimer?
Y. Mor. How say you, my Lord of Warwick?
War. Nay, do your pleasures: I know how 'twill prove.
Pem. Then give him me.
Gav. Sweet sovereign, yet I come
   To see thee ere I die!
War. Yet not perhaps,
   If Warwick's wit and policy prevail. [Aside.
Y. Mor. My Lord of Pembroke, we deliver him you:
   Return him on your honour.—Sound, away!
                   [Exeunt all except Pembroke, Arundel, Gaveston, James
                       and other attendants of Pembroke.
Pem. My lord, you shall go with me:
   My house is not far hence; out of the way
   A little; but our men shall go along.
   We that have pretty wenches to our wives,
   Sir, must not come so near to balk their lips.
Arun. 'Tis very kindly spoke, my Lord of Pembroke:
   Your honour hath an adamant of power
   To draw a prince.
Pem. So, my lord.—Come hither, James:
   I do commit this Gaveston to thee;
   Be thou this night his keeper; in the morning
   We will discharge thee of thy charge: be gone.
Gav. Unhappy Gaveston, whither go'st thou now?
                     [Exit with James and other Attendants of Pembroke.
Horse-boy. My lord, we'll quickly be at Cobham. [Exeunt.
  Enter GAVESTON mourning, JAMES and other Attendants
                        of PEMBROKE.
Gav. O treacherous Warwick, thus to wrong thy friend!
James. I see it is your life these arms pursue.
Gav. Weaponless must I fall, and die in bands?
   O, must this day be period of my life,
   Centre of all my bliss? And ye be men,
   Speed to the king.
Enter WARWICK and Soldiers.

War. My Lord of Pembroke's men,
   Strive you no longer: I will have that Gaveston.
James. Your lordship doth dishonour to yourself,
   And wrong our lord, your honourable friend.
War. No, James, it is my country's cause I follow.—
   Go, take the villain: soldiers, come away;
   We'll make quick work.—Commend me to your master,
   My friend, and tell him that I watch'd it well.—
   Come, let thy shadow parley with King Edward.
Gav. Treacherous earl, shall I not see the king?
War. The king of heaven perhaps, no other king.—
   Away! [Exeunt Warwick and Soldiers with Gaveston.
James. Come, fellows: it booted not for us to strive:
   We will in haste go certify our lord. [Exeunt.
Enter KING EDWARD, the younger SPENSER, BALDOCK, Noblemen
  of the king's side, and Soldiers with drums and fifes.
K. Edw. I long to hear an answer from the barons
   Touching my friend, my dearest Gaveston.
   Ah, Spenser, not the riches of my realm
   Can ransom him! ah, he is mark'd to die!
   I know the malice of the younger Mortimer;
   Warwick I know is rough, and Lancaster
   Inexorable; and I shall never see
   My lovely Pierce of Gaveston again:
   The barons overbear with me their pride.
Y. Spen. Were I King Edward, England's sovereign,
   Son to the lovely Eleanor of Spain,
   Great Edward Longshanks' issue, would I bear
   These braves, this rage, and suffer uncontroll'd
   These barons thus to beard me in my land,
   In mine own realm? My lord, pardon my speech:
   Did you retain your father's magnanimity,
   Did you regard the honour of your name,
   You would not suffer thus your majesty
   Be counterbuff'd of your nobility.
   Strike off their heads, and let them preach on poles:
   No doubt, such lessons they will teach the rest,
   As by their preachments they will profit much,
   And learn obedience to their lawful king.
K. Edw. Yes, gentle Spenser, we have been too mild,
   Too kind to them; but now have drawn our sword,
   And, if they send me not my Gaveston,
   We'll steel it on their crest[s], and poll their tops.
Bald. This haught resolve becomes your majesty,
   Not to be tied to their affection,
   As though your highness were a school-boy still,
   And must be aw'd and govern'd like a child.
    Enter the elder SPENSER with his truncheon, and
                       Soldiers.
E. Spen. Long live my sovereign, the noble Edward,
   In peace triumphant, fortunate in wars!
K. Edw. Welcome, old man: com'st thou in Edward's aid?
   Then tell thy prince of whence and what thou art.
E. Spen. Low, with a band of bow-men and of pikes,
   Brown bills and targeteers, four hundred strong,
   Sworn to defend King Edward's royal right,
   I come in person to your majesty,
   Spenser, the father of Hugh Spenser there,
   Bound to your highness everlastingly
   For favour done, in him, unto us all.
K. Edw. Thy father, Spenser?
Y. Spen. True, an it like your grace,
   That pours, in lieu of all your goodness shown,
   His life, my lord, before your princely feet.
K. Edw. Welcome ten thousand times, old man, again!
   Spenser, this love, this kindness to thy king,
   Argues thy noble mind and disposition.
   Spenser, I here create thee Earl of Wiltshire,
   And daily will enrich thee with our favour,
   That, as the sunshine, shall reflect o'er thee.
   Beside, the more to manifest our love,
   Because we hear Lord Bruce doth sell his land,
   And that the Mortimers are in hand withal,
   Thou shalt have crowns of us t'outbid the barons;
   And, Spenser, spare them not, lay it on.—
   Soldiers, a largess, and thrice-welcome all!
Y. Spen. My lord, here comes the queen.
     Enter QUEEN ISABELLA, PRINCE EDWARD, and
                       LEVUNE.
K. Edw. Madam, what news?
Q. Isab. News of dishonour, lord, and discontent.
   Our friend Levune, faithful and full of trust,
   Informeth us, by letters and by words,
   That Lord Valois our brother, King of France,
   Because your highness hath been slack in homage,
   Hath seized Normandy into his hands:
   These be the letters, this the messenger.
K. Edw. Welcome, Levune.—Tush, Sib, if this be all,
   Valois and I will soon be friends again.—
   But to my Gaveston: shall I never see,
   Never behold thee now!—Madam, in this matter
   We will employ you and your little son;
   You shall go parley with the King of France.—
   Boy, see you bear you bravely to the king,
   And do your message with a majesty.
P. Edw. Commit not to my youth things of more weight
   Than fits a prince so young as I to bear;
   And fear not, lord and father,—heaven's great beams
   On Atlas' shoulder shall not lie more safe
   Than shall your charge committed to my trust.
Q. Isab. Ah, boy, this towardness makes thy mother fear
   Thou art not mark'd to many days on earth!
K. Edw. Madam, we will that you with speed be shipp'd,
   And this our son; Levune shall follow you
   With all the haste we can despatch him hence.
   Choose of our lords to bear you company;
   And go in peace; leave us in wars at home.
Q. Isab. Unnatural wars, where subjects brave their king:
   God end them once!—My lord, I take my leave,
   To make my preparation for France. [Exit with Prince Edward.
Enter ARUNDEL.

K. Edw. What, Lord Arundel, dost thou come alone?
Arun. Yea, my good lord, for Gaveston is dead.
K. Edw. Ah, traitors, have they put my friend to death?
   Tell me, Arundel, died he ere thou cam'st,
   Or didst thou see my friend to take his death?
Arun. Neither, my lord; for, as he was surpris'd,
   Begirt with weapons and with enemies round,
   I did your highness' message to them all,
   Demanding him of them, entreating rather,
   And said, upon the honour of my name,
   That I would undertake to carry him
   Unto your highness, and to bring him back.
K. Edw. And, tell me, would the rebels deny me that?
Y. Spen. Proud recreants!
K. Edw. Yea, Spenser, traitors all!
Arun. In found them at the first inexorable;
   The Earl of Warwick would not bide the hearing,
   Mortimer hardly; Pembroke and Lancaster
   Spake least; and when they flatly had denied,
   Refusing to receive me pledge for him,
   The Earl of Pembroke mildly thus bespake;
   "My lord, because our sovereign sends for him,
   And promiseth he shall be safe return'd,
   I will this undertake, to have him hence,
   And see him re-deliver'd to your hands."
K. Edw. Well, and how fortunes [it] that he came not?
Y. Spen. Some treason or some villany was cause.
Arun. The Earl of Warwick seiz'd him on his way;
   For, being deliver'd unto Pembroke's men,
   Their lord rode home, thinking his prisoner safe;
   But, ere he came, Warwick in ambush lay,
   And bare him to his death; and in a trench
   Strake off his head, and march'd unto the camp.
Y. Spen. A bloody part, flatly 'gainst law of arms!
K. Edw. O, shall I speak, or shall I sigh and die!
Y. Spen. My lord, refer your vengeance to the sword
   Upon these barons; hearten up your men;
   Let them not unreveng'd murder your friends:
   Advance your standard, Edward, in the field,
   And march to fire them from their starting-holes.
K. Edw. [kneeling.] By earth, the common mother of us all,
   By heaven, and all the moving orbs thereof,
   By this right hand, and by my father's sword,
   And all the honours 'longing to my crown,
   I will have heads and lives for him as many
   As I have manors, castles, towns, and towers!— [Rises.
   Treacherous Warwick! traitorous Mortimer!
   If I be England's king, in lakes of gore
   Your headless trunks, your bodies will I trail,
   That you may drink your fill, and quaff in blood,
   And stain my royal standard with the same,
   That so my bloody colours may suggest
   Remembrance of revenge immortally
   On your accursed traitorous progeny,
   You villains that have slain my Gaveston!—
   And in this place of honour and of trust,
   Spenser, sweet Spenser, I adopt thee here;
   And merely of our love we do create thee
   Earl of Glocester and Lord Chamberlain,
   Despite of times, despite of enemies.
Y. Spen. My lord, here's a messenger from the barons
   Desires access unto your majesty.
K. Edw. Admit him near.
Enter Herald with his coat of arms.

Her. Long live King Edward, England's lawful lord!
K. Edw. So wish not they, I wis, that sent thee hither:
   Thou com'st from Mortimer and his complices:
   A ranker rout of rebels never was.
   Well, say thy message.
Her. The barons, up in arms, by me salute
   Your highness with long life and happiness;
   And bid me say, as plainer to your grace,
   That if without effusion of blood
   You will this grief have ease and remedy,
   That from your princely person you remove
   This Spenser, as a putrifying branch
   That deads the royal vine, whose golden leaves
   Empale your princely head, your diadem;
   Whose brightness such pernicious upstarts dim,
   Say they, and lovingly advise your grace
   To cherish virtue and nobility,
   And have old servitors in high esteem,
   And shake off smooth dissembling flatterers:
   This granted, they, their honours, and their lives,
   Are to your highness vow'd and consecrate.
Y. Spen. Ah, traitors, will they still display their pride?
K. Edw. Away! tarry no answer, but be gone!—
   Rebels, will they appoint their sovereign
   His sports, his pleasures, and his company?—
   Yet, ere thou go, see how I do divorce [Embraces young Spenser.
   Spenser from thee. Now get thee to thy lords,
   And tell them I will come to chastise them
   For murdering Gaveston: hie thee, get thee gone!
   Edward, with fire and sword, follows at thy heels. [Exit Herald.
   My lord[s], perceive you how these rebels swell?—
   Soldiers, good hearts! defend your sovereign's right,
   For, now, even now, we march to make them stoop.
   Away!
                      [Exeunt. Alarums, excursions, a great fight, and a
                            retreat sounded, within.
   Re-enter KING EDWARD, the elder SPENSER, the younger
     SPENSER, BALDOCK, and Noblemen of the king's side.
K. Edw. Why do we sound retreat? upon them, lords!
   This day I shall your vengeance with my sword
   On those proud rebels that are up in arms,
   And do confront and countermand their king.
Y. Spen. I doubt it not, my lord; right will prevail.
E. Spen. 'Tis not amiss, my liege, for either part
   To breathe a while; our men, with sweat and dust
   All chok'd well near, begin to faint for heat;
   And this retire refresheth horse and man.
Y. Spen. Here come the rebels.
   Enter the younger MORTIMER, LANCASTER, WARWICK,
                 PEMBROKE, and others.
Y. Mor. Look, Lancaster, yonder is Edward Among his flatterers. _Lan._And there let him be, Till he pay dearly for their company. War. And shall, or Warwick's sword shall smite in vain. K. Edw. What, rebels, do you shrink and sound retreat? Y. Mor. No, Edward, no; thy flatterers faint and fly. Lan. They'd best betimes forsake thee and their trains, For they'll betray thee, traitors as they are. Y. Spen. Traitor on thy face, rebellious Lancaster! Pem. Away, base upstart! brav'st thou nobles thus? E. Spen. A noble attempt and honourable deed, Is it not, trow ye, to assemble aid And levy arms against your lawful king? K. Edw. For which, ere long, their heads shall satisfy T' appease the wrath of their offended king. Y. Mor. Then, Edward, thou wilt fight it to the last, And rather bathe thy sword in subjects' blood Than banish that pernicious company? K. Edw. Ay, traitors all, rather than thus be brav'd, Make England's civil towns huge heaps of stones, And ploughs to go about our palace-gates. War. A desperate and unnatural resolution!— Alarum to the fight! Saint George for England, and the barons' right! K. Edw. Saint George for England, and King Edward's right! [Alarums. Exeunt the two parties severally.

Enter KING EDWARD and his followers, with the Barons and KENT captive.

K. Edw. Now, lusty lords, now not by chance of war,
   But justice of the quarrel and the cause,
   Vail'd is your pride: methinks you hang the heads
   But we'll advance them, traitors: now 'tis time
   To be aveng'd on you for all your braves,
   And for the murder of my dearest friend,
   To whom right well you knew our soul was knit,
   Good Pierce of Gaveston, my sweet favourite:
   Ah, rebels, recreants, you made him away!
Kent. Brother, in regard of thee and of thy land,
   Did they remove that flatterer from thy throne.
K. Edw. So, sir, you have spoke: away, avoid our presence!
                                                            [Exit Kent.
   Accursed wretches, was't in regard of us,
   When we had sent our messenger to request
   He might be spar'd to come to speak with us,
   And Pembroke undertook for his return,
   That thou, proud Warwick, watch'd the prisoner,
   Poor Pierce, and headed him 'gainst law of arms?
   For which thy head shall overlook the rest
   As much as thou in rage outwent'st the rest.
War. Tyrant, I scorn thy threats and menaces;
   It is but temporal that thou canst inflict.
Lan. The worst is death; and better die to live
   Than live in infamy under such a king.
K. Edw. Away with them, my lord of Winchester!
   These lusty leaders, Warwick and Lancaster,
   I charge you roundly, off with both their heads!
   Away!
War. Farewell, vain world!
Lan. Sweet Mortimer, farewell!
Y. Mor. England, unkind to thy nobility,
   Groan for this grief! behold how thou art maim'd!
K. Edw. Go, take that haughty Mortimer to the Tower;
   There see him safe bestow'd; and, for the rest,
   Do speedy execution on them all.
   Be gone!
Y. Mor. What, Mortimer, can ragged stony walls
   Immure thy virtue that aspires to heaven?
   No, Edward, England's scourge, it may not be;
   Mortimer's hope surmounts his fortune far.
                                       [The captive Barons are led off.
K. Edw. Sound, drums and trumpets! March with me, my friends.
   Edward this day hath crown'd him king anew.
                                 [Exeunt all except the younger Spenser,
                                     Levune and Baldock.
Y. Spen. Levune, the trust that we repose in thee
   Begets the quiet of King Edward's land:
   Therefore be gone in haste, and with advice
   Bestow that treasure on the lords of France,
   That, therewith all enchanted, like the guard
   That suffer'd Jove to pass in showers of gold
   To Danaë, all aid may be denied
   To Isabel the queen, that now in France
   Makes friends, to cross the seas with her young son,
   And step into his father's regiment.
Levune. That's it these barons and the subtle queen
   Long levell'd at.
Bal. Yea, but, Levune, thou seest,
   These barons lay their heads on blocks together:
   What they intend, the hangman frustrates clean.
Levune. Have you no doubt, my lords, I'll clap so close
   Among the lords of France with England's gold,
   That Isabel shall make her plaints in vain,
   And France shall be obdurate with her tears.
Y. Spen. Then make for France amain; Levune, away!
   Proclaim King Edward's wars and victories. [Exeunt.
Enter KENT.

Kent. Fair blows the wind for France: blow, gentle gale,
   Till Edmund be arriv'd for England's good!
   Nature, yield to my country's cause in this!
   A brother? no, a butcher of thy friends!
   Proud Edward, dost thou banish me thy presence?
   But I'll to France, and cheer the wronged queen,
   And certify what Edward's looseness is.
   Unnatural king, to slaughter nobleman
   And cherish flatterers! Mortimer, I stay
   Thy sweet escape. Stand gracious, gloomy night,
   To his device!
Enter the younger MORTIMER disguised.

Y. Mor. Holla! who walketh there?
   Is't you, my lord?
Kent. Mortimer, 'tis I.
   But hath thy portion wrought so happily?
Y. Mor. It hath, my lord: the warders all asleep,
   I thank them, gave me leave to pass in peace.
   But hath your grace got shipping unto France?
Kent. Fear it not. [Exeunt.
Enter QUEEN ISABELLA and PRINCE EDWARD.

Q. Isab. Ah, boy, our friends do fail us all in France!
   The lords are cruel, and the king unkind.
   What shall we do?
P. Edw. Madam, return to England,
   And please my father well; and then a fig
   For all my uncle's friendship here in France!
   I warrant you, I'll win his highness quickly;
   'A loves me better than a thousand Spensers.
Q. Isab. Ah, boy, thou art deceiv'd, at least in this,
   To think that we can yet be tun'd together!
   No, no, we jar too far.—Unkind Valois!
   Unhappy Isabel, when France rejects,
   Whither, O, whither dost thou bend thy steps?
Enter SIR JOHN OF HAINAULT.

Sir J. Madam, what cheer?
Q. Isab. Ah, good Sir John of Hainault,
   Never so cheerless nor so far distrest!
Sir J. I hear, sweet lady, of the king's unkindness:
   But droop not, madam; noble minds contemn
   Despair. Will your grace with me to Hainault,
   And there stay time's advantage with your son?—
   How say you, my lord! will you go with your friends,
   And shake off all our fortunes equally?
P. Edw. So pleaseth the queen my mother, me it likes:
   The king of England, not the court of France,
   Shall have me from my gracious mother's side,
   Till I be strong enough to break a staff;
   And then have at the proudest Spenser's head!
Sir J. Well said, my lord!
Q. Isab. O my sweet heart, how do I moan thy wrongs,
   Yet triumph in the hope of thee, my joy!—
   Ah, sweet Sir John, even to the utmost verge
   Of Europe, on the shore of Tanais,
   Will we with thee to Hainault—so we will:
   The marquis is a noble gentleman;
   His grace, I dare presume, will welcome me.—
   But who are these?
Enter KENT and the younger MORTIMER.

Kent. Madam, long may you live,
   Much happier than your friends in England do!
Q. Isab. Lord Edmund and Lord Mortimer alive!
   Welcome to France! the news was here, my lord,
   That you were dead, or very near your death.
Y. Mor. Lady, the last was truest of the twain:
   But Mortimer, reserv'd for better hap,
   Hath shaken off the thraldom of the Tower,
   And lives t' advance your standard, good my lord.
P. Edw. How mean you, and the king my father lives?
   No, my Lord Mortimer, not I, I trow.
Q. Isab. Not, son! Why not? I would it were no worse!—
   But, gentle lords, friendless we are in France.
Y. Mor. Monsieur Le Grand, a noble friend of yours,
   Told us, at our arrival, all the news,—
   How hard the nobles, how unkind the king
   Hath show'd himself: but, madam, right makes room
   Where weapons want; and, though a many friends
   Are made away, as Warwick, Lancaster,
   And others of our part and faction,
   Yet have we friends, assure your grace, in England,
   Would cast up caps, and clap their hands for joy,
   To see us there, appointed for our foes.
Kent. Would all were well, and Edward well reclaim'd,
   For England's honour, peace, and quietness!
Y. Mor. But by the sword, my lord, 't must be deserv'd:
   The king will ne'er forsake his flatterers.
Sir J. My lords of England, sith th' ungentle king
   Of France refuseth to give aid of arms
   To this distressed queen, his sister, here,
   Go you with her to Hainault: doubt ye not
   We will find comfort, money, men, and friends,
   Ere long to bid the English king a base.—
   How say'st, young prince, what think you of the match?
P. Edw. I think King Edward will outrun us all.
Q. Isab. Nay, son, not so; and you must not discourage
   Your friends that are so forward in your aid.
Kent. Sir John of Hainault, pardon us, I pray:
   These comforts that you give our woful queen
   Bind us in kindness all at your command.
Q. Isab. Yea, gentle brother:—and the God of heaven
   Prosper your happy motion, good Sir John!
Y. Mor. This noble gentleman, forward in arms,
   Was born, I see, to be our anchor-hold.—
   Sir John of Hainault, be it thy renown,
   That England's queen and nobles in distress
   Have been by thee restor'd and comforted.
Sir J. Madam, along; and you, my lord[s], with me,
   That England's peers may Hainault's welcome see. [Exeunt.
   Enter KING EDWARD, ARUNDEL, the elder SPENSER, the
               younger SPENSER, and others.
K. Edw. Thus, after many threats of wrathful war,
   Triumpheth England's Edward with his friends,
   And triumph Edward with his friends uncontroll'd!—
   My Lord of Glocester, do you hear the news?
Y. Spen. What news, my lord?
K. Edw. Why, man, they say there is great execution
   Done through the realm.—My Lord of Arundel,
   You have the note, have you not?
_Arun._From the Lieutenant of the Tower, my lord.
K. Edw. I pray, let us see it. [Takes the note from Arundel.
   —What have we there?—
   Read it, Spenser.
                             [Gives the note to young Spenser, who reads
                                 their names.
   Why, so: they bark'd apace a month ago;
   Now, on my life, they'll neither bark nor bite.
   Now, sirs, the news from France? Glocester, I trow,
   The lords of France love England's gold so well
   As Isabella gets no aid from thence.
   What now remains? have you proclaim'd, my lord,
   Reward for them can bring in Mortimer?
Y. Spen. My lord, we have; and, if he be in England,
   'A will be had ere long, I doubt it not.
K. Edw. If, dost thou say? Spenser, as true as death,
   He is in England's ground: our port-masters
   Are not so careless of their king's command.
Enter a Messenger.

   How now! what news with thee? from whence come these?
Mess. Letters, my lord, and tidings forth of France:
   To you, my Lord of Glocester, from Levune.
                                       [Gives letters to young Spenser.
K. Edw. Read.
Y. Spen. [reading.] My duty to your honour promised, etc., I
   have, according to instructions in that behalf, dealt with the
   King of France and his lords, and effected that the queen, all
   discontented and discomforted, is gone: whither, if you ask,
   with Sir John of Hainault, brother to the marquis, into
   Flanders. With them are gone Lord Edmund and the Lord
   Mortimer, having in their company divers of your nation,
   and others; and, as constant report goeth, they intend to
   give King Edward battle in England, sooner than he can
   look for them. This is all the news of import.
                           Your honour's in all service, Levune.
K. Edw. Ah, villains, hath that Mortimer escap'd?
   With him is Edmund gone associate?
   And will Sir John of Hainault lead the round?
   Welcome, o' God's name, madam, and your son!
   England shall welcome you and all your rout.
   Gallop apace, bright Phbus, through the sky;
   And, dusky Night, in rusty iron car,
   Between you both shorten the time, I pray,
   That I may see that most desired day,
   When we may meet these traitors in the field!
   Ah, nothing grieves me, but my little boy
   Is thus misled to countenance their ills!
   Come, friends, to Bristow, there to make us strong:
   And, winds, as equal be to bring them in,
   As you injurious were to bear them forth! [Exeunt.
   Enter QUEEN ISABELLA, PRINCE EDWARD, KENT, the
     younger MORTIMER, and SIR JOHN OF HAINAULT.
Q. Isab. Now, lords, our loving friends and countrymen,
   Welcome to England all, with prosperous winds!
   Our kindest friends in Belgia have we left,
   To cope with friends at home; a heavy case
   When force to force is knit, and sword and glaive
   In civil broils make kin and countrymen
   Slaughter themselves in others, and their sides
   With their own weapons gor'd! But what's the help?
   Misgovern'd kings are cause of all this wreck;
   And, Edward, thou art one among them all,
   Whose looseness hath betray'd thy land to spoil,
   Who made the channel overflow with blood
   Of thine own people: patron shouldst thou be;
   But thou—
Y. Mor. Nay, madam, if you be a warrior,
   You must not grow so passionate in speeches.—
   Lords, sith that we are, by sufferance of heaven,
   Arriv'd and armed in this prince's right,
   Here for our country's cause swear we to him
   All homage, fealty, and forwardness;
   And for the open wrongs and injuries
   Edward hath done to us, his queen, and land,
   We come in arms to wreck it with the sword;
   That England's queen in peace may repossess
   Her dignities and honours; and withal
   We may remove these flatterers from the king
   That havock England's wealth and treasury.
Sir J. Sound trumpets, my lord, and forward let us march.
   Edward will think we come to flatter him.
Kent. I would he never had been flatter'd more! [Exeunt.
Enter KING EDWARD, BALDOCK, and the younger SPENSER.

Y. Spen. Fly, fly, my lord! the queen is overstrong;
   Her friends do multiply, and yours do fail.
   Shape we our course to Ireland, there to breathe.
K. Edw. What, was I born to fly and run away,
   And leave the Mortimers conquerors behind?
   Give me my horse, and let's reinforce our troops.
   And in this bed of honour die with fame.
Bald. O, no, my lord! this princely resolution
   Fits not the time: away! we are pursu'd. [Exeunt.
Enter KENT, with a sword and target.

Kent. This way he fled; but I am come too late.
   Edward, alas, my heart relents for thee!
   Proud traitor, Mortimer, why dost thou chase
   Thy lawful king, thy sovereign, with thy sword?
   Vile wretch, and why hast thou, of all unkind,
   Borne arms against thy brother and thy king?
   Rain showers of vengeance on my cursed head,
   Thou God, to whom in justice it belongs
   To punish this unnatural revolt!
   Edward, this Mortimer aims at thy life:
   O, fly him, then! But, Edmund, calm this rage;
   Dissemble, or thou diest; for Mortimer
   And Isabel do kiss, while they conspire:
   And yet she bears a face of love, forsooth:
   Fie on that love that hatcheth death and hate!
   Edmund, away! Bristow to Longshanks' blood
   Is false; be not found single for suspect:
   Proud Mortimer pries near into thy walks.
  Enter QUEEN ISABELLA, PRINCE EDWARD, the younger
       MORTIMER, and SIR JOHN JOHN OF HAINAULT.
Q. Isab. Successful battle gives the God of kings
   To them that fight in right, and fear in wrath,
   Since, then, successfully we have prevail'd,
   Thanked be heaven's great architect, and you!
   Ere farther we proceed, my noble lords,
   We here create our well-beloved son,
   Of love and care unto his royal person,
   Lord Warden of the realm; and, sith the Fates
   Have made his father so infortunate,
   Deal you, my lords, in this, my loving lords,
   As to your wisdoms fittest seems in all.
Kent. Madam, without offence if I may ask
   How will you deal with Edward in his fall?
P. Edw. Tell me, good uncle, what Edward do you mean?
Kent. Nephew, your father; I dare not call him king.
Y. Mor. My Lord of Kent, what needs these questions?
   'Tis not in her controlment nor in ours;
   But as the realm and parliament shall please,
   So shall your brother be disposed of.—
   I like not this relenting mood in Edmund:
   Madam, 'tis good to look to him betimes. [Aside to the Queen.
Q. Isab. My lord, the Mayor of Bristow knows our mind.
Y. Mor. Yea, madam; and they scape not easily
   That fled the field.
Q. Isab. Baldock is with the king:
   A goodly chancellor, is he not, my lord?
Sir J. So are the Spensers, the father and the son.
Y. Mor. This Edward is the ruin of the realm.
  Enter RICE AP HOWEL with the elder SPENSER prisoner,
                      and Attendants.
Rice. God save Queen Isabel and her princely son!
   Madam, the Mayor and citizens of Bristow,
   In sign of love and duty to this presence,
   Present by me this traitor to the state,
   Spenser, the father to that wanton Spenser,
   That, like the lawless Catiline of Rome,
   Revell'd in England's wealth and treasury.
Isab. We thank you all.
Y. Mor. Your loving care in this
   Deserveth princely favours and rewards.
   But where's the king and the other Spenser fled?
Rice. Spenser the son, created Earl of Glocester,
   Is with that smooth-tongu'd scholar Baldock gone,
   And shipp'd but late for Ireland with the king.
Y. Mor. Some whirlwind fetch them back, or sink them all!— [Aside.
   They shall be started thence, I doubt it not.
P. Edw. Shall I not see the king my father yet?
Kent. Unhappy Edward, chas'd from England's bounds! [Aside.
Sir J. Madam, what resteth? why stand you in a muse?
Q. Isab. I rue my lord's ill-fortune: but, alas,
   Care of my country call'd me to this war!
Y. Mor. Madam, have done with care and sad complaint:
   Your king hath wrong'd your country and himself,
   And we must seek to right it as we may.—
   Meanwhile have hence this rebel to the block.
E. Spen. Rebel is he that fights against the prince:
   So fought not they that fought in Edward's right.
Y. Mor. Take him away; he prates.
                             [Exeunt Attendants with the elder Spenser.
                                     You, Rice ap Howel,
   Shall do good service to her majesty,
   Being of countenance in your country here,
   To follow these rebellious runagates.—
   We in mean while, madam, must take advice.
   How Baldock, Spenser, and their complices,
   May in their fall be follow'd to their end. [Exeunt.
   Enter the Abbot, Monks, KING EDWARD, the younger
   SPENSER, and BALDOCK (the three latter disguised).
Abbot. Have you no doubt, my lord; have you no fear:
   As silent and as careful we will be
   To keep your royal person safe with us,
   Free from suspect, and fell invasion
   Of such as have your majesty in chase,
   Yourself, and those your chosen company,
   As danger of this stormy time requires.
K. Edw. Father, thy face should harbour no deceit.
   O, hadst thou ever been a king, thy heart,
   Pierc'd deeply with sense of my distress,
   Could not but take compassion of my state!
   Stately and proud in riches and in train,
   Whilom I was, powerful and full of pomp:
   But what is he whom rule and empery
   Have not in life or death made miserable?—
   Come, Spenser,—come, Baldock,—come, sit down by me;
   Make trial now of that philosophy
   That in our famous nurseries of arts
   Thou suck'dst from Plato and from Aristotle.—
   Father, this life contemplative is heaven:
   O, that I might this life in quiet lead!
   But we, alas, are chas'd!—and you, my friends,
   Your lives and my dishonour they pursue.—
   Yet, gentle monks, for treasure, gold, nor fee,
   Do you betray us and our company.
First Monk. Your grace may sit secure, if none but we
   Do wot of your abode.
Y. Spen. Not one alive: but shrewdly I suspect
   A gloomy fellow in a mead below;
   'A gave a long look after us, my lord;
   And all the land, I know, is up in arms,
   Arms that pursue our lives with deadly hate.
Bald. We were embark'd for Ireland; wretched we,
   With awkward winds and with sore tempests driven,
   To fall on shore, and here to pine in fear
   Of Mortimer and his confederates!
K. Edw. Mortimer! who talks of Mortimer?
   Who wounds me with the name of Mortimer,
   That bloody man?—Good father, on thy lap
   Lay I this head, laden with mickle care.
   O, might I never ope these eyes again,
   Never again lift up this drooping head,
   O, never more lift up this dying heart!
Y. Spen. Look up, my lord.—Baldock, this drowsiness
   Betides no good; here even we are betray'd.
   Enter, with Welsh hooks, RICE AP HOWEL, a Mower,
                    and LEICESTER.
Mow. Upon my life, these be the men ye seek.
Rice. Fellow, enough.—My lord, I pray, be short;
   A fair commission warrants what we do.
Leices. The queen's commission, urg'd by Mortimer:
   What cannot gallant Mortimer with the queen?—
   Alas, see where he sits, and hopes unseen
   T'escape their hands that seek to reave his life!
   Too true it is, Quem dies vidit veniens superbum,
   Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem.
   But, Leicester, leave to grow so passionate.—
   Spenser and Baldock, by no other names,
   I arrest you of high treason here.
   Stand not on titles, but obey th' arrest:
   'Tis in the name of Isabel the queen.—
   My lord, why droop you thus?
K. Edw. O day, the last of all my bliss on earth!
   Centre of all misfortune! O my stars,
   Why do you lour unkindly on a king?
   Comes Leicester, then, in Isabella's name,
   To take my life, my company from me?
   Here, man, rip up this panting breast of mine,
   And take my heart in rescue of my friends.
Rice. Away with them!
Y. Spen. It may become thee yet
   To let us take our farewell of his grace.
Abbott. My heart with pity earns to see this sight;
   A king to bear these words and proud commands! [Aside.
K. Edw. Spenser, ah, sweet Spenser, thus, then, must we part?
Y. Spen. We must, my lord; so will the angry heavens.
K. Edw. Nay, so will hell and cruel Mortimer:
   The gentle heavens have not to do in this.
Bald. My lord, it is in vain to grieve or storm.
   Here humbly of your grace we take our leaves:
   Our lots are cast; I fear me, so is thine.
K. Edw. In heaven we may, in earth ne'er shall we meet:—
   And, Leicester, say, what shall become of us?
Leices. Your majesty must go to Killingworth.
K. Edw. Must! it is somewhat hard when kings must go.
Leices. Here is a litter ready for your grace,
   That waits your pleasure, and the day grows old.
Rice. As good be gone, as stay and be benighted.
K. Edw. A litter hast thou? lay me in a hearse,
   And to the gates of hell convey me hence;
   Let Pluto's bells ring out my fatal knell,
   And hags howl for my death at Charon's shore;
   For friends hath Edward none but these,
   And these must die under a tyrant's sword.
Rice. My lord, be going: care not for these;
   For we shall see them shorter by the heads.
K. Edw. Well, that shall be shall be: part we must;
   Sweet Spenser, gentle Baldock, part we must.—
   Hence, feigned weeds! unfeigned are my woes.—
                                            [Throwing off his disguise.
   Father, farewell.—Leicester, thou stay'st for me;
   And go I must.—Life, farewell, with my friends!
                                     [Exeunt King Edward and Leicester.
Y. Spen. O, is he gone? is noble Edward gone?
   Parted from hence, never to see us more!
   Rend, sphere of heaven! and, fire, forsake thy orb!
   Earth, melt to air! gone is my sovereign,
   Gone, gone, alas, never to make return!
Bald. Spenser, I see our souls are fleeting hence;
   We are depriv'd the sunshine of our life.
   Make for a new life, man; throw up thy eyes
   And heart and hand to heaven's immortal throne;
   Pay nature's debt with cheerful countenance;
   Reduce we all our lessons unto this,—
   To die, sweet Spenser, therefore live we all;
   Spenser, all live to die, and rise to fall.
Rice. Come, come, keep these preachments till you come to
   the place appointed. You, and such as you are, have
   made wise work in England. Will your lordships away?
Mow. Your lordship I trust will remember me?
Rice. Remember thee, fellow! what else? Follow me to
   the town. [Exeunt.
    Enter KING EDWARD, LEICESTER, the BISHOP OF
               WINCHESTER, and TRUSSEL.
Leices. Be patient, good my lord, cease to lament;
   Imagine Killingworth Castle were your court,
   And that you lay for pleasure here a space,
   Not of compulsion or necessity.
K. Edw. Leicester, if gentle words might comfort me,
   Thy speeches long ago had eas'd my sorrows,
   For kind and loving hast thou always been.
   The griefs of private men are soon allay'd;
   But not of kings. The forest deer, being struck,
   Runs to an herb that closeth up the wounds:
   But when the imperial lion's flesh is gor'd,
   He rends and tears it with his wrathful paw,
   [And], highly scorning that the lowly earth
   Should drink his blood, mounts up to the air:
   And so it fares with me, whose dauntless mind
   Th' ambitious Mortimer would seek to curb,
   And that unnatural queen, false Isabel,
   That thus hath pent and mew'd me in a prison
   For such outrageous passions cloy my soul,
   As with the wings of rancour and disdain
   Full oft[ten] am I soaring up to heaven,
   To plain me to the gods against them both.
   But when I call to mind I am a king,
   Methinks I should revenge me of my wrongs,
   That Mortimer and Isabel have done.
   But what are kings, when regiment is gone,
   But perfect shadows in a sunshine day?
   My nobles rule; I bear the name of king,
   I wear the crown; but am controll'd by them,
   By Mortimer, and my unconstant queen,
   Who spots my nuptial bed with infamy;
   Whilst I am lodg'd within this cave of care,
   Where sorrow at my elbow still attends,
   To company my heart with sad laments,
   That bleeds within me for this strange exchange.
   But tell me, must I now resign my crown,
   To make usurping Mortimer a king?
Bish. of Win. Your grace mistakes; it is for England's good,
   And princely Edward's right, we crave the crown.
K. Edw. No, 'tis for Mortimer, not Edward's head
   For he's a lamb, emcompassed by wolves,
   Which in a moment will abridge his life.
   But, if proud Mortimer do wear this crown,
   Heavens turn it to a blaze of quenchless fire!
   Or, like the snaky wreath of Tisiphon,
   Engirt the temples of his hateful head!
   So shall not England's vine be perished,
   But Edward's name survive, though Edward dies.
Leices. My lord, why waste you thus the time away?
   They stay your answer: will you yield your crown?
K. Edw. Ah, Leicester, weigh how hardly I can brook
   To lose my crown and kingdom without cause;
   To give ambitious Mortimer my right,
   That, like a mountain, overwhelms my bliss;
   In which extreme my mind here murder'd is!
   But that the heavens appoint I must obey.—
   Here, take my crown; the life of Edward too: [Taking off the crown.
   Two kings in England cannot reign at once.
   But stay a while: let me be king till night,
   That I may gaze upon this glittering crown;
   So shall my eyes receive their last content,
   My head, the latest honour due to it,
   And jointly both yield up their wished right.
   Continue ever, thou celestial sun;
   Let never silent night possess this clime;
   Stand still, you watches of the element;
   All times and seasons, rest you at a stay,
   That Edward may be still fair England's king!
   But day's bright beams doth vanish fast away,
   And needs I must resign my wished crown.
   Inhuman creatures, nurs'd with tiger's milk,
   Why gape you for your sovereign's overthrow?
   My diadem, I mean, and guiltless life.
   See, monsters, see! I'll wear my crown again.
                                                 [Putting on the crown.
   What, fear you not the fury of your king?—
   But, hapless Edward, thou art fondly led;
   They pass not for thy frowns as late they did,
   But seek to make a new-elected king;
   Which fills my mind with strange despairing thoughts,
   Which thoughts are martyred with endless torments;
   And in this torment comfort find I none,
   But that I feel the crown upon my head;
   And therefore let me wear it yet a while.
Trus. My, lord, the parliament must have present news;
   And therefore say, will you resign or no?
                                                      [The king rageth.
K. Edw. I'll not resign, but, whilst I live, [be king].
   Traitors, be gone, and join you with Mortimer.
   Elect, conspire, install, do what you will:
   Their blood and yours shall seal these treacheries.
Bish. of Win. This answer we'll return; and so, farewell.
                                                   [Going with Trussel.
Leices. Call them again, my lord, and speak them fair;
   For, if they go, the prince shall lose his right.
K. Edw. Call thou them back; I have no power to speak.
Leices. My lord, the king is willing to resign.
Bish. of Win. If he be not, let him choose.
K. Edw. O, would I might! but heavens and earth conspire
   To make me miserable. Here, receive my crown.
   Receive it? no, these innocent hands of mine
   Shall not be guilty of so foul a crime;
   He of you all that most desires my blood,
   And will be call'd the murderer of a king,
   Take it. What, are you mov'd? pity you me?
   Then send for unrelenting Mortimer,
   And Isabel, whose eyes being turn'd to steel
   Will sooner sparkle fire than shed a tear.
   Yet stay; for, rather than I'll look on them,
   Here, here! [Gives the crown.]—Now, sweet God of heaven,
   Make me despise this transitory pomp,
   And sit fot aye enthronised in heaven!
   Come, death, and with thy fingers close my eyes,
   Or, if I live, let me forget myself!
Bish. of Win. My lord,—
K. Edw. Call me not lord; away, out of my sight!
   Ah, pardon me! grief makes me lunatic.
   Let not that Mortimer protect my son;
   More safety there is in a tiger's jaws
   Than his embracements. Bear this to the queen,
   Wet with my tears, and dried again with sighs:
                                                 [Gives a handkerchief.
   If with the sight thereof she be not mov'd,
   Return it back, and dip it in my blood.
   Commend me to my son, and bid him rule
   Better than I: yet how have I transgress'd,
   Unless it be with too much clemency?
Trus. And thus, most humbly do we take our leave.
K. Edw. Farewell.
                   [Exeunt the Bishop of Winchester and Trussel with the
                      crown.
                     I know the next news that they bring
   Will be my death; and welcome shall it be:
   To wretched men death is felicity.
Leices. Another post! what news brings he?
Enter BERKELEY, who gives a paper to LEICESTER.

K. Edw. Such news as I expect.—Come, Berkeley, come, And tell thy message to my naked breast. Berk. My lord, think not a thought so villanous Can harbour in a man of noble birth. To do your highness service and devoir, And save you from your foes, Berkeley would die. Leices. My lord, the council of the queen command That I resign my charge. K. Edw. And who must keep me now? Must you, my lord? Berk. Ay, my most gracious lord; so 'tis decreed. K. Edw. [Taking the paper.] By Mortimer, whose name is written here! Well may I rent his name that rends my heart. [Tears it. This poor revenge hath something eas'd my mind: So may his limbs be torn as is this paper! Hear me, immortal Jove, and grant it too! Berk. Your grace must hence with me to Berkeley straight. K. Edw. Whither you will: all places are alike, And every earth is fit for burial. Leices. Favour him, my lord, as much as lieth in you. Berk. Even so betide my soul as I use him! K. Edw. Mine enemy hath pitied my estate, And that's the cause that I am now remov'd. Berk. And thinks your grace that Berkeley will be cruel? K. Edw. I know not; but of this am I assur'd, That death ends all, and I can die but once.— Leicester, farewell. Leices. Not yet, my lord; I'll bear you on your way. [Exeunt.

Enter QUEEN ISABELLA and the younger MORTIMER.

Y. Mor. Fair Isabel, now have we our desire;
   The proud corrupters of the light-brain'd king
   Have done their homage to the lofty gallows,
   And he himself lies in captivity.
   Be rul'd by me, and we will rule the realm:
   In any case take heed of childish fear,
   For now we hold an old wolf by the ears,
   That, if he slip, will seize upon us both,
   And gripe the sorer, being grip'd himself.
   Think therefore, madam, that imports us much
   To erect your son with all the speed we may,
   And that I be protector over him:
   For our behoof, 'twill bear the greater sway
   Whenas a king's name shall be under-writ.
Q. Isab. Sweet Mortimer, the life of Isabel,
   Be thou persuaded that I love thee well;
   And therefore, so the prince my son be safe,
   Whom I esteem as dear as these mine eyes,
   Conclude against his father what thou wilt,
   And I myself will willingly subscribe.
Y. Mor. First would I hear news he were depos'd,
   And then let me alone to handle him.
Enter Messenger.

Letters! from whence? Mess. From Killingworth, my lord? Q. Isab. How fares my lord the king? Mess. In health, madam, but full of pensiveness. Q. Isab. Alas, poor soul, would I could ease his grief!

Enter the BISHOP OF WINCHESTER with the crown.

   Thanks, gentle Winchester.—
                               Sirrah, be gone. [Exit Messenger.
Bish. of Win. The king hath willingly resign'd his crown.
Q. Isab. O, happy news! send for the prince my son.
Bish. of Win. Further, or this letter was seal'd, Lord Berkeley came,
   So that he now is gone from Killingworth;
   And we have heard that Edmund laid a plot
   To set his brother free; nor more but so.
   The Lord of Berkeley is so pitiful
   As Leicester that had charge of him before.
Q. Isab. Then let some other be his guardian.
Y. Mor. Let me alone; here is the privy-seal,—
                                                [Exit the Bish. of Win.
   Who's there? Call hither, Gurney and Matrevis.—
                                                 [To Attendants within.
   To dash the heavy-headed Edmund's drift,
   Berkeley shall be discharg'd, the king remov'd,
   And none but we shall know where he lieth.
Q. Isab. But, Mortimer, as long as he survives,
   What safety rests for us or for my son?
Y. Mor. Speak, shall he presently be despatch'd and die?
Q. Isab. I would he were, so 'twere not by my means!
Enter MATREVIS and GURNEY.

Y. Mor. Enough.—Matrevis, write a letter presently
   Unto the Lord of Berkeley from ourself,
   That he resign the king to thee and Gurney;
   And, when 'tis done, we will subscribe our name.
Mat. It shall be done, my lord. [Writes.
Y. Mor. Gurney,—
Gur. My lord?
Y. Mor. As thou intend'st to rise by Mortimer,
   Who now makes Fortune's wheel turn as he please,
   Seek all the means thou canst to make him droop,
   And neither give him kind word nor good look.
Gur. I warrant you, my lord.
Y. Mor. And this above the rest: because we hear
   That Edmund casts to work his liberty,
   Remove him still from place to place by night,
   Till at the last he come to Killingworth,
   And then from thence to Berkeley back again;
   And by the way, to make him fret the more,
   Speak curstly to him; and in any case
   Let no man comfort him, if he chance to weep,
   But amplify his grief with bitter words.
Mat. Fear not, my lord; we'll do as you command.
Y. Mor. So, now away! post thitherwards amain.
Q. Isab. Whither goes this letter? to my lord the king?
   Commend me humbly to his majesty,
   And tell him that I labour all in vain
   To ease his grief and work his liberty;
   And bear him this as witness of my love. [Gives ring.
Mat. I will, madam. [Exit with Gurney.
Y. Mor. Finely dissembled! do so still, sweet queen.
   Here comes the young prince with the Earl of Kent.
Q. Isab. Something he whispers in his childish ears.
Y. Mor. If he have such access unto the prince,
   Our plots and stratagems will soon be dash'd.
Q. Isab. Use Edmund friendly, as if all were well.
Enter PRINCE EDWARD, and KENT talking with him.

Y. Mor. How fares my honourable Lord of Kent? Kent. In health, sweet Mortimer.—How fares your grace? Q. Isab. Well, if my lord your brother were enlarg'd. Kent. I hear of late he hath depos'd himself. Q. Isab. The more my grief. Y. Mor. And mine. Kent. Ah, they do dissemble! [Aside. Q. Isab. Sweet son, come hither; I must talk with thee. Y. Mor. You, being his uncle and the next of blood, Do look to be protector o'er the prince. Kent. Not I, my lord: who should protect the son, But she that gave him life? I mean the queen. P. Edw. Mother, persuade me not to wear the crown: Let him be king; I am too young to reign. Q. Isab. But be content, seeing 'tis his highness' pleasure. P. Edw. Let me but see him first, and then I will. Kent. Ay, do, sweet nephew. Q. Isab. Brother, you know it is impossible. P. Edw. Why, is he dead? Q. Isab. No, God forbid! Kent. I would those words proceeded from your heart! Y. Mor. Inconstant Edmund, dost thou favour him, That wast a cause of his imprisonment? Kent. The more cause now have I to make amends. Y. Mor. [aside to Q. ISAB.] I tell thee, 'tis not meet that one so false Should come about the person of a prince.— My lord, he hath betray'd the king his brother, And therefore trust him not. P. Edw. But he repents, and sorrows for it now. Q. Isab. Come, son, and go with this gentle lord and me. P. Edw. With you I will, but not with Mortimer. Y. Mor. Why, youngling, 'sdain'st thou so of Mortimer? Then I will carry thee by force away. P. Edw. Help, uncle Kent! Mortimer will wrong me. Q. Isab. Brother Edmund, strive not; we are his friends; Isabel is nearer than the Earl of Kent. Kent. Sister, Edward is my charge; redeem him. Q. Isab. Edward is my son, and I will keep him. Kent. Mortimer shall know that he hath wronged me. Hence will I haste to Killingworth Castle, And rescue aged Edward from his foes, To be reveng'd on Mortimer and thee. [Aside. [Exeunt, on the one side, Queen Isabella, Prince Edward and the younger Mortimer; on other other, Kent.

       Enter MATREVIS, GURNEY, and Soldiers, with
                         KING EDWARD.
Mat. My lord, be not pensive; we are your friends:
   Men are ordain'd to live in misery;
   Therefore, come; dalliance dangereth our lives.
K. Edw. Friends, whither must unhappy Edward go?
   Will hateful Mortimer appoint no rest?
   Must I be vexed like the nightly bird,
   Whose sight is loathsome to all winged fowls?
   When will the fury of his mind assuage?
   When will his heart be satisfied with blood?
   If mine will serve, unbowel straight this breast,
   And give my heart to Isabel and him:
   It is the chiefest mark they level at.
_Gur._Not so, my liege: the queen hath given this charge,
   To keep your grace in safety:
   Your passions make your dolours to increase.
K. Edw. This usage makes my misery increase.
   But can my air of life continue long,
   When all my senses are annoy'd with stench?
   Within a dungeon England's king is kept,
   Where I am starv'd for want of sustenance;
   My daily diet is heart-breaking sobs,
   That almost rent the closet of my heart:
   Thus lives old Edward not reliev'd by any,
   And so must die, though pitied by many.
   O, water, gentle friends, to cool my thirst,
   And clear my body from foul excrements!
Mat. Here's channel-water, as our charge is given:
   Sit down, for we'll be barbers to your grace.
K. Edw. Traitors, away! what, will you murder me,
   Of choke your sovereign with puddle-water?
Gur. No, but wash your face, and shave away your beard,
   Lest you be known, and so be rescued.
Mat. Why strive you thus? your labour is in vain.
K. Edw. The wren may strive against the lion's strength,
   But all in vain: so vainly do I strive
   To seek for mercy at a tyrant's hand.
                   [They wash him with puddle-water, and shave his beard
                     away.
   Immortal powers, that know the painful cares
   That wait upon my poor distressed soul,
   O, level all your looks upon these daring men
   That wrong their liege and sovereign, England's king!
   O Gaveston, it is for thee that I am wrong'd!
   For me both thou and both the Spensers died;
   And for your sakes a thousand wrongs I'll take.
   The Spensers' ghosts, wherever they remain,
   Wish well to mine; then, tush, for them I'll die.
Mat. 'Twixt theirs and yours shall be no enmity.
   Come, come, away! Now put the torches out:
   We'll enter in by darkness to Killingworth.
Gur. How now! who comes there?
Enter KENT.

Mat. Guard the king sure: it is the Earl of Kent. K. Edw. O gentle brother, help to rescue me! Mat. Keep them asunder; thrust in the king. Kent. Soldiers, let me but talk to him one word. Gur. Lay hands upon the earl for his assault. Kent. Lay down your weapons, traitors! yield the king! Mat. Edmund, yield thou thyself, or thou shalt die. Kent. Base villains, wherefore do you gripe me thus? Gur. Bind him, and so convey him to the court. Kent. Where is the court but here? here is the king And I will visit him: why stay you me? Mat. The court is where Lord Mortimer remains: Thither shall your honour go; and so, farewell. [Exeunt Matrevis and Gurney with King Edward. Kent. O, miserable is that common-weal, Where lords keep courts, and kings are lock'd in prison! First Sold. Wherefore stay we? on, sirs, to the court! Kent. Ay, lead me whither you will, even to my death, Seeing that my brother cannot be releas'd. [Exeunt.

Enter the younger MORTIMER.

Y. Mor. The king must die, or Mortimer goes down;
   The commons now begin to pity him:
   Yet he that is the cause of Edward's death,
   Is sure to pay for it when his son's of age;
   And therefore will I do it cunningly.
   This letter, written by a friend of ours,
   Contains his death, yet bids then save his life;
                                                                [Reads.
   Edwardum occidere nolite timere, bonum est,
   Fear not to kill the king, 'tis good he die:
   But read it thus, and that's another sense;
   Edwardum occidere nolite, timere bonum est,
   Kill not the king, 'tis good to fear the worst.
   Unpointed as it is, thus shall it go.
   That, being dead, if it chance to be found,
   Matrevis and the rest may bear the blame,
   And we be quit that caus'd it to be done.
   Within this room is lock'd the messenger
   That shall convey it, and perform the rest;
   And, by a secret token that he bears,
   Shall he be murder'd when the deed is done.—
   Lightborn, come forth!
Enter LIGHTBORN.

                           Art thou so resolute as thou wast?
Light. What else, my lord? and far more resolute.
Y. Mor. And hast thou cast how to accomplish it?
Light. Ay, ay; and none shall know which way he died.
Y. Mor. But at his looks, Lightborn, thou wilt relent.
Light. Relent! ha, ha! I use much to relent.
Y. Mor. Well, do it bravely, and be secret.
Light. You shall not need to give instructions;
   'Tis not the first time I have kill'd a man:
   I learn'd in Naples how to poison flowers;
   To strangle with a lawn thrust down the throat;
   To pierce the wind pipe with a needle's point;
   Or, whilst one is asleep, to take a quill,
   And blow a little powder in his ears;
   Or open his mouth, and pour quick-silver down.
   But yet I have a braver way than these.
Y. Mor. What's that?
Light. Nay, you shall pardon me; none shall know my tricks.
Y. Mor. I care not how it is, so it be not spied.
   Deliver this to Gurney and Matrevis: [Gives letter.
   At every ten-mile end thou hast a horse:
   Take this [Gives money]: away, and never see me more!
Light. No?
Y. Mor. No; unless thou bring me news of Edward's death.
Light. That will I quickly do. Farewell, my lord. [Exit.
Y. Mor. The prince I rule, the queen do I command,
   And with a lowly congé to the ground
   The proudest lords salute me as I pass;
   I seal, I cancel, I do what I will.
   Fear'd am I more than lov'd;—let me be fear'd,
   And, when I frown, make all the court look pale.
   I view the prince with Aristarchus' eyes,
   Whose looks were as a breeching to a boy.
   They thrust upon me the protectorship,
   And sue to me for that that I desire;
   While at the council-table, grave enough,
   And not unlike a bashful puritan,
   First I complain of imbecility,
   Saying it is onus quam gravissimum;
   Till, being interrupted by my friends,
   Suscepi that provinciam, as they term it;
   And, to conclude, I am Protector now.
   Now all is sure: the queen and Mortimer
   Shall rule the realm, the king; and none rule us.
   Mine enemies will I plague, my friends advance;
   And what I list command who dare control?
   Major sum quàm cui possit fortuna nocere:
   And that this be the coronation-day,
   It pleaseth me and Isabel the queen. [Trumpets within.
   The trumpets sound; I must go take my place.
  Enter KING EDWARD THE THIRD, QUEEN ISABELLA, the
    ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, Champion, and Nobles.
Archb. of Cant. Long live King Edward, by the grace of God King of England and Lord of Ireland! Cham. If any Christian, Heathen, Turk, or Jew, Dares but affirm that Edward's not true king, And will avouch his saying with the sword, I am the Champion that will combat him. Y. Mor. None comes: sound, trumpets! [Trumpets. K. Edw. Third. Champion, here's to thee. [Gives purse. Q. Isab. Lord Mortimer, now take him to your charge.

Enter Soldiers with KENT prisoner.

Y. Mor. What traitor have we there with blades and bills? First Sold. Edmund the Earl of Kent. K. Edw. Third. What hath he done? First Sold. 'A would have taken the king away perforce, As we were bringing him to Killingworth. Y. Mor. Did you attempt his rescue, Edmund? speak. Kent. Mortimer, I did: he is our king, And thou compell'st this prince to wear the crown. Y. Mor. Strike off his head: he shall have martial law. Kent. Strike off my head! base traitor, I defy thee! K. Edw. Third. My lord, he is my uncle, and shall live. Y. Mor. My lord, he is your enemy, and shall die. Kent. Stay, villains! K. Edw. Third. Sweet mother, if I cannot pardon him, Entreat my Lord Protector for his life. Q. Isab. Son, be content: I dare not speak a word. K. Edw. Third. Nor I; and yet methinks I should command: But, seeing I cannot, I'll entreat for him.— My lord, if you will let my uncle live, I will requite it when I come to age. Y. Mor. 'Tis for your highness' good and for the realm's.— How often shall I bid you bear him hence? Kent. Art thou king? must I die at thy command? Y. Mor. At our command.—Once more, away with him! Kent. Let me but stay and speak; I will not go: Either my brother or his son is king, And none of both them thirst for Edmund's blood: And therefore, soldiers, whither will you hale me? [Soldiers hale Kent away, and carry him to be beheaded. K. Edw. Third. What safety may I look for at his hands, If that my uncle shall be murder'd thus? Q. Isab. Fear not, sweet boy; I'll guard thee from thy foes: Had Edmund liv'd, he would have sought thy death. Come, son, we'll ride a-hunting in the park. K. Edw. Third. And shall my uncle Edmund ride with us? Q. Isab. He is a traitor; think not on him: come. [Exeunt.

Enter MATREVIS and GURNEY.

Mat. Gurney, I wonder the king dies not,
   Being in a vault up to the knees in water,
   To which the channels of the castle run,
   From whence a damp continually ariseth,
   That were enough to poison any man,
   Much more a king, brought up so tenderly.
Gur. And so do I, Matrevis: yesternight
   I open'd but the door to throw him meat,
   And I was almost stifled with the savour.
Mat. He hath a body able to endure
   More than we can inflict: and therefore now
   Let us assail his mind another while.
Gur. Send for him out thence, and I will anger him.
Mat. But stay; who's this?
Enter LIGHTBORN.

Light. My Lord Protector greets you. [Gives letter.
Gur. What's there? I know not how to construe it.
Mat. Gurney, it was left unpointed for the nonce;
   Edwardum occidere nolite timere,
   That's his meaning.
Light. Know you this token? I must have the king. [Gives token.
Mat. Ay, stay a while; thou shalt have answer straight.—
   This villain's sent to make away the king.
Gur. I thought as much.
Mat. And, when the murder's done,
   See how he must be handled for his labour,—
   Pereat iste! Let him have the king;
   What else?—Here is the keys, this is the lake:
   Do as you are commanded by my lord.
Light. I know what I must do. Get you away:
   Yet be not far off; I shall need your help:
   See that in the next room I have a fire,
   And get me a spit, and let it be red-hot.
Mat. Very well.
Gur. Need you anything besides?
Light. What else? a table and a feather-bed.
Gur. That's all?
Light. Ay, ay: so, when I call you, bring it in.
Mat. Fear not thou that.
Gur. Here's a light to go into the dungeon.
                [Gives light to Lightborn, and then exit with Matrevis.
Light. So, now.
   Must I about this gear: ne'er was there any
   So finely handled as this king shall be.—
   Foh, here's a place indeed with all my heart!
K. Edw. Who's there? what light is that? wherefore com'st thou?
Light. To comfort you, and bring you joyful news.
K. Edw. Small comfort finds poor Edward in thy looks:
   Villain, I know thou com'st to murder me.
Light. To murder you, my most gracious lord?
   Far is it from my heart to do you harm.
   The queen sent me to see how you were us'd,
   For she relents at this your misery:
   And what eye can refrain from shedding tears,
   To see a king in this most piteous state?
K. Edw. Weep'st thou already? list a while to me,
   And then thy heart, were it as Gurney's is,
   Or as Matrevis', hewn from the Caucasus,
   Yet will it melt ere I have done my tale.
   This dungeon where they keep me is the sink
   Wherein the filth of all the castle falls.
Light. O villains!
K. Edw. And there, in mire and puddle, have I stood
   This ten days' space; and, lest that I should sleep,
   One plays continually upon a drum;
   They give me bread and water, being a king;
   So that, for want of sleep and sustenance,
   My mind's distemper'd, and my body's numb'd,
   And whether I have limbs or no I know not.
   O, would my blood dropp'd out from every vein,
   As doth this water from my tatter'd robes!
   Tell Isabel the queen, I look'd not thus,
   When for her sake I ran at tilt in France,
   And there unhors'd the Duke of Cleremont.
Light. O, speak no more, my lord! this breaks my heart.
   Lie on this bed, and rest yourself a while.
K. Edw. These looks of thine can harbour naught but death;
   I see my tragedy written in thy brows.
   Yet stay a while; forbear thy bloody hand,
   And let me see the stroke before it comes,
   That even then when I shall lose my life,
   My mind may be more steadfast on my God.
Light. What means your highness to mistrust me thus?
K. Edw. What mean'st thou to dissemble with me thus?
Light. These hands were never stain'd with innocent blood,
   Nor shall they now be tainted with a king's.
K. Edw. Forgive my thought for having such a thought.
   One jewel have I left; receive thou this: [Gives jewel.
   Still fear I, and I know not what's the cause,
   But every joint shakes as I give it thee.
   O, if thou harbour'st murder in thy heart,
   Let this gift change thy mind, and save thy soul!
   Know that I am a king: O, at that name
   I feel a hell of grief! where is my crown?
   Gone, gone! and do I [still] remain alive?
Light. You're overwatch'd, my lord: lie down and rest.
K. Edw. But that grief keeps me waking, I should sleep;
   For not these ten days have these eye-lids clos'd.
   Now, as I speak, they fall; and yet with fear
   Open again. O, wherefore sitt'st thou here?
Light. If you mistrust me, I'll be gone, my lord.
K. Edw. No, no; for, if thou mean'st to murder me,
   Thou wilt return again; and therefore stay. [Sleeps.
Light. He sleeps.
K. Edw. [waking] O, let me not die yet! O, stay a while!
Light. How now, my lord!
K. Edw. Something still buzzeth in mine ears,
   And tells me, if I sleep, I never wake:
   This fear is that which makes me tremble thus;
   And therefore tell me, wherefore art thou come?
Light. To rid thee of thy life.—Matrevis, come!
Enter MATREVIS and GURNEY.

K. Edw. I am too weak and feeble to resist.—
   Assist me, sweet God, and receive my soul!
Light. Run for the table.
K. Edw. O, spare me, or despatch me in a trice!
                   [Matrevis brings in a table. King Edward is murdered
                       by holding him down on the bed with the table, and
                       stamping on it.
Light. So, lay the table down, and stamp on it,
   But not too hard, lest that you bruise his body.
Mat. I fear me that this cry will raise the town,
   And therefore let us take horse and away.
Light. Tell me, sirs, was it not bravely done?
Gur. Excellent well: take this for thy reward.
                                            [Stabs Lightborn, who dies.
   Come, let us cast the body in the moat,
   And bear the king's to Mortimer our lord:
   Away! [Exeunt with the bodies.
Enter the younger MORTIMER and MATREVIS.

Y. Mor. Is't done, Matrevis, and the murderer dead?
Mat. Ay, my good lord: I would it were undone!
Y. Mor. Matrevis, if thou now grow'st penitent,
   I'll be thy ghostly father; therefore choose,
   Whether thou wilt be secret in this,
   Or else die by the hand of Mortimer.
Mat. Gurney, my lord, is fled, and will, I fear,
   Betray us both; therefore let me fly.
Y. Mor. Fly to the savages!
Mat. I humbly thank your honour. [Exit.
Y. Mor. As for myself, I stand as Jove's huge tree,
   And others are but shrubs compar'd to me:
   All tremble at my name, and I fear none:
   Let's see who dare impeach me for his death!
Enter QUEEN ISABELLA.

Q. Isab. Ah, Mortimer, the king my son hath news,
   His father's dead, and we have murder'd him!
Y. Mor. What if he have? the king is yet a child.
Q. Isab. Ay, but he tears his hair, and wrings his hands,
   And vows to be reveng'd upon us both.
   Into the council-chamber he is gone,
   To crave the aid and succour of his peers.
   Ay me, see where he comes, and they with him!
   Now, Mortimer, begins our tragedy.
Enter KING EDWARD THE THIRD, Lords, and Attendants.

First Lord. Fear not, my lord; know that you are a king. K. Edw. Third. Villain!— Y. Mor. Ho, now, my lord! K. Edw. Third. Think not that I am frighted with thy words: My father's murder'd through thy treachery; And thou shalt die, and on his mournful hearse Thy hateful and accursed head shall lie, To witness to the world that by thy means His kingly body was too soon interr'd. Q. Isab. Weep not, sweet son. K. Edw. Third. Forbid not me to weep; he was my father; And had you lov'd him half so well as I, You could not bear his death thus patiently: But you, I fear, conspir'd with Mortimer. First Lord. Why speak you not unto my lord the king? Y. Mor. Because I think scorn to be accus'd. Who is the man dares say I murder'd him? K. Edw. Third. Traitor, in me my loving father speaks, And plainly saith, 'twas thou that murder'dst him. Y. Mor. But hath your grace no other proof than this? K. Edw. Third. Yes, if this be the hand of Mortimer. [Showing letter. Y. Mor. False Gurney hath betray'd me and himself. [Aside to Queen Isabella. Q. Isab. I fear'd as much: murder can not be hid. Y. Mor. It is my hand; what gather you by this? K. Edw. Third. That thither thou didst send a murderer. Y. Mor. What murderer? bring forth the man I sent. K. Edw. Third. Ah, Mortimer, thou know'st that he is slain! And so shalt thou be too.—Why stays he here? Bring him unto a hurdle, drag him forth; Hang him, I say, and set his quarters up: And bring his head back presently to me. Q. Isab. For my sake, sweet son, pity Mortimer! Y. Mor. Madam, entreat not: I will rather die Than sue for life unto a paltry boy. K. Edw. Third. Hence with the traitor, with the murderer! Y. Mor. Base Fortune, now I see, that in thy wheel There is a point, to which when men aspire, They tumble headlong down: that point I touch'd, And, seeing there was no place to mount up higher, Why should I grieve at my declining fall?— Farewell, fair queen: weep not for Mortimer, That scorns the world, and, as a traveller, Goes to discover countries yet unknown. K. Edw. Third. What, suffer you the traitor to delay? [Exit the younger Mortimer with First Lord and some of the Attendants. Q. Isab. As thou receivest thy life from me, Spill not the blood of gentle Mortimer! K. Edw. Third. This argues that you spilt my father's blood, Else would you not entreat for Mortimer. Q. Isab. I spill his blood! no. K. Edw. Third. Ay, madam, you; for so the rumour runs. Q. Isab. That rumour is untrue: for loving thee, Is this report rais'd on poor Isabel. K. Edw. Third. I do not think her so unnatural. Sec. Lord. My lord, I fear me it will prove too true. K. Edw. Third. Mother, you are suspected for his death And therefore we commit you to the Tower, Till further trial may be made thereof. If you be guilty, though I be your son, Think not to find me slack or pitiful. Q. Isab. Nay, to my death; for too long have I liv'd, Whenas my son thinks to abridge my days. K. Edw. Third. Away with her! her words enforce these tears, And I shall pity her, if she speak again. Q. Isab. Shall I not mourn for my beloved lord? And with the rest accompany him to his grave. Sec. Lord. Thus, madam, 'tis the king's will you shall hence. Q. Isab. He hath forgotten me: stay; I am his mother. Sec. Lord. That boots not; therefore, gentle madam, go. Q. Isab. Then come, sweet death, and rid me of this grief! [Exit with Second Lord and some of the Attendants.

     Re-enter First Lord, with the head of the younger
                           MORTIMER.
First Lord. My lord, here is the head of Mortimer.
K. Edw. Third. Go fetch my father's hearse, where it shall lie;
   And bring my funeral robes. [Exeunt Attendants.
                                Accursed head,
   Could I have rul'd thee then, as I do now,
   Thou hadst not hatch'd this monstrous treachery!—
   Here comes the hearse: help me to mourn, my lords.
Re-enter Attendants, with the hearse and funeral robes.

   Sweet father, here unto thy murder'd ghost
   I offer up the wicked traitor's head;
   And let these tears, distilling from mine eyes,
   Be witness of my grief and innocency. [Exeunt.


ACT I.





SCENE I.

          Enter ORCANES king of Natolia, GAZELLUS viceroy of Byron,
          URIBASSA, 4 and their train, with drums and trumpets.

     ORCANES.  Egregious viceroys of these eastern parts,
     Plac'd by the issue of great Bajazeth,
     And sacred lord, the mighty Callapine,
     Who lives in Egypt prisoner to that slave
     Which kept his father in an iron cage,—
     Now have we march'd from fair Natolia
     Two hundred leagues, and on Danubius' banks
     Our warlike host, in complete armour, rest,
     Where Sigismund, the king of Hungary,
     Should meet our person to conclude a truce:
     What! shall we parle with the Christian?
     Or cross the stream, and meet him in the field?

     GAZELLUS.  King of Natolia, let us treat of peace:
     We all are glutted with the Christians' blood,
     And have a greater foe to fight against,—
     Proud Tamburlaine, that now in Asia,
     Near Guyron's head, doth set his conquering feet,
     And means to fire Turkey as he goes:
     'Gainst him, my lord, you must address your power.

     URIBASSA.  Besides, King Sigismund hath brought from Christendom
     More than his camp of stout Hungarians,—
     Sclavonians, Almains, Rutters, 5 Muffs, and Danes,
     That with the halberd, lance, and murdering axe,
     Will hazard that we might with surety hold.

     ORCANES. 6  Though from the shortest northern parallel,
     Vast Grantland, compass'd with the Frozen Sea,
     (Inhabited with tall and sturdy men,
     Giants as big as hugy 7 Polypheme,)
     Millions of soldiers cut the 8 arctic line,
     Bringing the strength of Europe to these arms,
     Our Turkey blades shall glide through all their throats,
     And make this champion 9 mead a bloody fen:
     Danubius' stream, that runs to Trebizon,
     Shall carry, wrapt within his scarlet waves,
     As martial presents to our friends at home,
     The slaughter'd bodies of these Christians:
     The Terrene 10 main, wherein Danubius falls,
     Shall by this battle be the bloody sea:
     The wandering sailors of proud Italy
     Shall meet those Christians, fleeting with the tide,
     Beating in heaps against their argosies,
     And make fair Europe, mounted on her bull,
     Trapp'd with the wealth and riches of the world,
     Alight, and wear a woful mourning weed.

     GAZELLUS.  Yet, stout Orcanes, pro-rex of the world,
     Since Tamburlaine hath muster'd all his men,
     Marching from Cairo 11 northward, with his camp,
     To Alexandria and the frontier towns,
     Meaning to make a conquest of our land,
     'Tis requisite to parle for a peace
     With Sigismund, the king of Hungary,
     And save our forces for the hot assaults
     Proud Tamburlaine intends Natolia.

     ORCANES.  Viceroy of Byron, wisely hast thou said.
     My realm, the centre of our empery,
     Once lost, all Turkey would be overthrown;
     And for that cause the Christians shall have peace.
     Sclavonians, Almains, Rutters, Muffs, and Danes,
     Fear 12 not Orcanes, but great Tamburlaine;
     Nor he, but Fortune that hath made him great.
     We have revolted Grecians, Albanese,
     Sicilians, Jews, Arabians, Turks, and Moors,
     Natolians, Sorians, 13 black 14 Egyptians,
     Illyrians, Thracians, and Bithynians, 15
     Enough to swallow forceless Sigismund,
     Yet scarce enough t' encounter Tamburlaine.
     He brings a world of people to the field,
     ]From Scythia to the oriental plage 16
     Of India, where raging Lantchidol
     Beats on the regions with his boisterous blows,
     That never seaman yet discovered.
     All Asia is in arms with Tamburlaine,
     Even from the midst of fiery Cancer's tropic
     To Amazonia under Capricorn;
     And thence, as far as Archipelago,
     All Afric is in arms with Tamburlaine:
     Therefore, viceroy, 17 the Christians must have peace.

          Enter SIGISMUND, FREDERICK, BALDWIN, and their
          train, with drums and trumpets.

     SIGISMUND.  Orcanes, (as our legates promis'd thee,)
     We, with our peers, have cross'd Danubius' stream,
     To treat of friendly peace or deadly war.
     Take which thou wilt; for, as the Romans us'd,
     I here present thee with a naked sword:
     Wilt thou have war, then shake this blade at me;
     If peace, restore it to my hands again,
     And I will sheathe it, to confirm the same.

     ORCANES.  Stay, Sigismund:  forgett'st thou I am he
     That with the cannon shook Vienna-walls,
     And made it dance upon the continent,
     As when the massy substance of the earth
     Quiver[s] about the axle-tree of heaven?
     Forgett'st thou that I sent a shower of darts,
     Mingled with powder'd shot and feather'd steel,
     So thick upon the blink-ey'd burghers' heads,
     That thou thyself, then County Palatine,
     The King of Boheme, 18 and the Austric Duke,
     Sent heralds out, which basely on their knees,
     In all your names, desir'd a truce of me?
     Forgett'st thou that, to have me raise my siege,
     Waggons of gold were set before my tent,
     Stampt with the princely fowl that in her wings
     Carries the fearful thunderbolts of Jove?
     How canst thou think of this, and offer war?

     SIGISMUND.  Vienna was besieg'd, and I was there,
     Then County Palatine, but now a king,
     And what we did was in extremity
     But now, Orcanes, view my royal host,
     That hides these plains, and seems as vast and wide
     As doth the desert of Arabia
     To those that stand on Bagdet's 19 lofty tower,
     Or as the ocean to the traveller
     That rests upon the snowy Appenines;
     And tell me whether I should stoop so low,
     Or treat of peace with the Natolian king.

     GAZELLUS.  Kings of Natolia and of Hungary,
     We came from Turkey to confirm a league,
     And not to dare each other to the field.
     A friendly parle 20 might become you both.

     FREDERICK.  And we from Europe, to the same intent; 21
     Which if your general refuse or scorn,
     Our tents are pitch'd, our men stand 22 in array,
     Ready to charge you ere you stir your feet.

     ORCANES.  So prest 23 are we:  but yet, if Sigismund
     Speak as a friend, and stand not upon terms,
     Here is his sword; let peace be ratified
     On these conditions specified before,
     Drawn with advice of our ambassadors.

     SIGISMUND.  Then here I sheathe it, and give thee my hand,
     Never to draw it out, or 24 manage arms
     Against thyself or thy confederates,
     But, whilst I live, will be at truce with thee.

     ORCANES.  But, Sigismund, confirm it with an oath,
     And swear in sight of heaven and by thy Christ.

     SIGISMUND.  By Him that made the world and sav'd my soul,
     The Son of God and issue of a maid,
     Sweet Jesus Christ, I solemnly protest
     And vow to keep this peace inviolable!

     ORCANES.  By sacred Mahomet, the friend of God,
     Whose holy Alcoran remains with us,
     Whose glorious body, when he left the world,
     Clos'd in a coffin mounted up the air,
     And hung on stately Mecca's temple-roof,
     I swear to keep this truce inviolable!
     Of whose conditions 25 and our solemn oaths,
     Sign'd with our hands, each shall retain a scroll,
     As memorable witness of our league.
     Now, Sigismund, if any Christian king
     Encroach upon the confines of thy realm,
     Send word, Orcanes of Natolia
     Confirm'd 26 this league beyond Danubius' stream,
     And they will, trembling, sound a quick retreat;
     So am I fear'd among all nations.

     SIGISMUND.  If any heathen potentate or king
     Invade Natolia, Sigismund will send
     A hundred thousand horse train'd to the war,
     And back'd by 27 stout lanciers of Germany,
     The strength and sinews of the imperial seat.

     ORCANES.  I thank thee, Sigismund; but, when I war,
     All Asia Minor, Africa, and Greece,
     Follow my standard and my thundering drums.
     Come, let us go and banquet in our tents:
     I will despatch chief of my army hence
     To fair Natolia and to Trebizon,
     To stay my coming 'gainst proud Tamburlaine:
     Friend Sigismund, and peers of Hungary,
     Come, banquet and carouse with us a while,
     And then depart we to our territories.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter CALLAPINE, and ALMEDA his keeper.

     CALLAPINE.  Sweet Almeda, pity the ruthful plight
     Of Callapine, the son of Bajazeth,
     Born to be monarch of the western world,
     Yet here detain'd by cruel Tamburlaine.

     ALMEDA.  My lord, I pity it, and with my heart
     Wish your release; but he whose wrath is death,
     My sovereign lord, renowmed 28 Tamburlaine,
     Forbids you further liberty than this.

     CALLAPINE.  Ah, were I now but half so eloquent
     To paint in words what I'll perform in deeds,
     I know thou wouldst depart from hence with me!

     ALMEDA.  Not for all Afric:  therefore move me not.

     CALLAPINE.  Yet hear me speak, my gentle Almeda.

     ALMEDA.  No speech to that end, by your favour, sir.

     CALLAPINE.  By Cairo 29 runs—

     ALMEDA.  No talk of running, I tell you, sir.

     CALLAPINE.  A little further, gentle Almeda.

     ALMEDA.  Well, sir, what of this?

     CALLAPINE.  By Cairo runs to Alexandria-bay
     Darotes' stream, 30 wherein at 31 anchor lies
     A Turkish galley of my royal fleet,
     Waiting my coming to the river-side,
     Hoping by some means I shall be releas'd;
     Which, when I come aboard, will hoist up sail,
     And soon put forth into the Terrene 32 sea,
     Where, 33 'twixt the isles of Cyprus and of Crete,
     We quickly may in Turkish seas arrive.
     Then shalt thou see a hundred kings and more,
     Upon their knees, all bid me welcome home.
     Amongst so many crowns of burnish'd gold,
     Choose which thou wilt, all are at thy command:
     A thousand galleys, mann'd with Christian slaves,
     I freely give thee, which shall cut the Straits,
     And bring armadoes, from 34 the coasts of Spain,
     Fraughted with gold of rich America:
     The Grecian virgins shall attend on thee,
     Skilful in music and in amorous lays,
     As fair as was Pygmalion's ivory girl
     Or lovely Io metamorphosed:
     With naked negroes shall thy coach be drawn,
     And, as thou rid'st in triumph through the streets,
     The pavement underneath thy chariot-wheels
     With Turkey-carpets shall be covered,
     And cloth of arras hung about the walls,
     Fit objects for thy princely eye to pierce:
     A hundred bassoes, cloth'd in crimson silk,
     Shall ride before thee on Barbarian steeds;
     And, when thou goest, a golden canopy
     Enchas'd with precious stones, which shine as bright
     As that fair veil that covers all the world,
     When Phoebus, leaping from his hemisphere,
     Descendeth downward to th' Antipodes:—
     And more than this, for all I cannot tell.

     ALMEDA.  How far hence lies the galley, say you?

     CALLAPINE.  Sweet Almeda, scarce half a league from hence.

     ALMEDA.  But need 35 we not be spied going aboard?

     CALLAPINE.  Betwixt the hollow hanging of a hill,
     And crooked bending of a craggy rock,
     The sails wrapt up, the mast and tacklings down,
     She lies so close that none can find her out.

     ALMEDA.  I like that well:  but, tell me, my lord,
     if I should let you go, would you be as good as
     your word? shall I be made a king for my labour?

     CALLAPINE.  As I am Callapine the emperor,
     And by the hand of Mahomet I swear,
     Thou shalt be crown'd a king, and be my mate!

     ALMEDA.  Then here I swear, as I am Almeda,
     Your keeper under Tamburlaine the Great,
     (For that's the style and title I have yet,)
     Although he sent a thousand armed men
     To intercept this haughty enterprize,
     Yet would I venture to conduct your grace,
     And die before I brought you back again!

     CALLAPINE.  Thanks, gentle Almeda:  then let us haste,
     Lest time be past, and lingering let 36 us both.

     ALMEDA.  When you will, my lord:  I am ready.

     CALLAPINE.  Even straight:—and farewell, cursed Tamburlaine!
     Now go I to revenge my father's death.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, ZENOCRATE, and their three sons,
          CALYPHAS, AMYRAS, and CELEBINUS, with drums and trumpets.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now, bright Zenocrate, the world's fair eye,
     Whose beams illuminate the lamps of heaven,
     Whose cheerful looks do clear the cloudy air,
     And clothe it in a crystal livery,
     Now rest thee here on fair Larissa-plains,
     Where Egypt and the Turkish empire part
     Between thy sons, that shall be emperors,
     And every one commander of a world.

     ZENOCRATE.  Sweet Tamburlaine, when wilt thou leave these arms,
     And save thy sacred person free from scathe,
     And dangerous chances of the wrathful war?

     TAMBURLAINE.  When heaven shall cease to move on both the poles,
     And when the ground, whereon my soldiers march,
     Shall rise aloft and touch the horned moon;
     And not before, my sweet Zenocrate.
     Sit up, and rest thee like a lovely queen.
     So; now she sits in pomp and majesty,
     When these, my sons, more precious in mine eyes
     Than all the wealthy kingdoms I subdu'd,
     Plac'd by her side, look on their mother's face.
     But yet methinks their looks are amorous,
     Not martial as the sons of Tamburlaine:
     Water and air, being symboliz'd in one,
     Argue their want of courage and of wit;
     Their hair as white as milk, and soft as down,
     (Which should be like the quills of porcupines,
     As black as jet, and hard as iron or steel,)
     Bewrays they are too dainty for the wars;
     Their fingers made to quaver on a lute,
     Their arms to hang about a lady's neck,
     Their legs to dance and caper in the air,
     Would make me think them bastards, not my sons,
     But that I know they issu'd from thy womb,
     That never look'd on man but Tamburlaine.

     ZENOCRATE.  My gracious lord, they have their mother's looks,
     But, when they list, their conquering father's heart.
     This lovely boy, the youngest of the three,
     Not long ago bestrid a Scythian steed,
     Trotting the ring, and tilting at a glove,
     Which when he tainted 37 with his slender rod,
     He rein'd him straight, and made him so curvet
     As I cried out for fear he should have faln.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Well done, my boy! thou shalt have shield and lance,
     Armour of proof, horse, helm, and curtle-axe,
     And I will teach thee how to charge thy foe,
     And harmless run among the deadly pikes.
     If thou wilt love the wars and follow me,
     Thou shalt be made a king and reign with me,
     Keeping in iron cages emperors.
     If thou exceed thy elder brothers' worth,
     And shine in complete virtue more than they,
     Thou shalt be king before them, and thy seed
     Shall issue crowned from their mother's womb.

     CELEBINUS.  Yes, father; you shall see me, if I live,
     Have under me as many kings as you,
     And march with such a multitude of men
     As all the world shall 38 tremble at their view.

     TAMBURLAINE.  These words assure me, boy, thou art my son.
     When I am old and cannot manage arms,
     Be thou the scourge and terror of the world.

     AMYRAS.  Why may not I, my lord, as well as he,
     Be term'd the scourge and terror of 39 the world?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Be all a scourge and terror to 40 the world,
     Or else you are not sons of Tamburlaine.

     CALYPHAS.  But, while my brothers follow arms, my lord,
     Let me accompany my gracious mother:
     They are enough to conquer all the world,
     And you have won enough for me to keep.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Bastardly boy, sprung 41 from some coward's loins,
     And not the issue of great Tamburlaine!
     Of all the provinces I have subdu'd
     Thou shalt not have a foot, unless thou bear
     A mind courageous and invincible;
     For he shall wear the crown of Persia
     Whose head hath deepest scars, whose breast most wounds,
     Which, being wroth, sends lightning from his eyes,
     And in the furrows of his frowning brows
     Harbours revenge, war, death, and cruelty;
     For in a field, whose superficies 42
     Is cover'd with a liquid purple veil,
     And sprinkled with the brains of slaughter'd men,
     My royal chair of state shall be advanc'd;
     And he that means to place himself therein,
     Must armed wade up to the chin in blood.

     ZENOCRATE.  My lord, such speeches to our princely sons
     Dismay their minds before they come to prove
     The wounding troubles angry war affords.

     CELEBINUS.  No, madam, these are speeches fit for us;
     For, if his chair were in a sea of blood,
     I would prepare a ship and sail to it,
     Ere I would lose the title of a king.

     AMYRAS.  And I would strive to swim through 43 pools of blood,
     Or make a bridge of murder'd carcasses, 44
     Whose arches should be fram'd with bones of Turks,
     Ere I would lose the title of a king.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, lovely boys, ye shall be emperors both,
     Stretching your conquering arms from east to west:—
     And, sirrah, if you mean to wear a crown,
     When we 45 shall meet the Turkish deputy
     And all his viceroys, snatch it from his head,
     And cleave his pericranion with thy sword.

     CALYPHAS.  If any man will hold him, I will strike,
     And cleave him to the channel 46 with my sword.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Hold him, and cleave him too, or I'll cleave thee;
     For we will march against them presently.
     Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane
     Promis'd to meet me on Larissa-plains,
     With hosts a-piece against this Turkish crew;
     For I have sworn by sacred Mahomet
     To make it parcel of my empery.
     The trumpets sound; Zenocrate, they come.
          Enter THERIDAMAS, and his train, with drums and trumpets.
     Welcome, Theridamas, king of Argier.

     THERIDAMAS.  My lord, the great and mighty Tamburlaine,
     Arch-monarch of the world, I offer here
     My crown, myself, and all the power I have,
     In all affection at thy kingly feet.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thanks, good Theridamas.

     THERIDAMAS.  Under my colours march ten thousand Greeks,
     And of Argier and Afric's frontier towns
     Twice twenty thousand valiant men-at-arms;
     All which have sworn to sack Natolia.
     Five hundred brigandines are under sail,
     Meet for your service on the sea, my lord,
     That, launching from Argier to Tripoly,
     Will quickly ride before Natolia,
     And batter down the castles on the shore.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well said, Argier! receive thy crown again.
          Enter USUMCASANE and TECHELLES.
     Kings of Morocco 47 and of Fez, welcome.

     USUMCASANE.  Magnificent and peerless Tamburlaine,
     I and my neighbour king of Fez have brought,
     To aid thee in this Turkish expedition,
     A hundred thousand expert soldiers;
     ]From Azamor to Tunis near the sea
     Is Barbary unpeopled for thy sake,
     And all the men in armour under me,
     Which with my crown I gladly offer thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thanks, king of Morocco:  take your crown again.

     TECHELLES.  And, mighty Tamburlaine, our earthly god,
     Whose looks make this inferior world to quake,
     I here present thee with the crown of Fez,
     And with an host of Moors train'd to the war, 48
     Whose coal-black faces make their foes retire,
     And quake for fear, as if infernal 49 Jove,
     Meaning to aid thee 50 in these 51 Turkish arms,
     Should pierce the black circumference of hell,
     With ugly Furies bearing fiery flags,
     And millions of his strong 52 tormenting spirits:
     ]From strong Tesella unto Biledull
     All Barbary is unpeopled for thy sake.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thanks, king of Fez:  take here thy crown again.
     Your presence, loving friends and fellow-kings,
     Makes me to surfeit in conceiving joy:
     If all the crystal gates of Jove's high court
     Were open'd wide, and I might enter in
     To see the state and majesty of heaven,
     It could not more delight me than your sight.
     Now will we banquet on these plains a while,
     And after march to Turkey with our camp,
     In number more than are the drops that fall
     When Boreas rents a thousand swelling clouds;
     And proud Orcanes of Natolia
     With all his viceroys shall be so afraid,
     That, though the stones, as at Deucalion's flood,
     Were turn'd to men, he should be overcome.
     Such lavish will I make of Turkish blood,
     That Jove shall send his winged messenger
     To bid me sheathe my sword and leave the field;
     The sun, unable to sustain the sight,
     Shall hide his head in Thetis' watery lap,
     And leave his steeds to fair Bootes' 53 charge;
     For half the world shall perish in this fight.
     But now, my friends, let me examine ye;
     How have ye spent your absent time from me?

     USUMCASANE.  My lord, our men of Barbary have march'd
     Four hundred miles with armour on their backs,
     And lain in leaguer 54 fifteen months and more;
     For, since we left you at the Soldan's court,
     We have subdu'd the southern Guallatia,
     And all the land unto the coast of Spain;
     We kept the narrow Strait of Jubalter, 55
     And made Canaria call us kings and lords:
     Yet never did they recreate themselves,
     Or cease one day from war and hot alarms;
     And therefore let them rest a while, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  They shall, Casane, and 'tis time, i'faith.

     TECHELLES.  And I have march'd along the river Nile
     To Machda, where the mighty Christian priest,
     Call'd John the Great, 56 sits in a milk-white robe,
     Whose triple mitre I did take by force,
     And made him swear obedience to my crown.
     ]From thence unto Cazates did I march,
     Where Amazonians met me in the field,
     With whom, being women, I vouchsaf'd a league,
     And with my power did march to Zanzibar,
     The western part of Afric, where I view'd
     The Ethiopian sea, rivers and lakes,
     But neither man nor child in all the land:
     Therefore I took my course to Manico,
     Where, 57 unresisted, I remov'd my camp;
     And, by the coast of Byather, 58 at last
     I came to Cubar, where the negroes dwell,
     And, conquering that, made haste to Nubia.
     There, having sack'd Borno, the kingly seat,
     I took the king and led him bound in chains
     Unto Damascus, 59 where I stay'd before.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well done, Techelles!—What saith Theridamas?

     THERIDAMAS.  I left the confines and the bounds of Afric,
     And made 60 a voyage into Europe,
     Where, by the river Tyras, I subdu'd
     Stoka, Podolia, and Codemia;
     Then cross'd the sea and came to Oblia,
     And Nigra Silva, where the devils dance,
     Which, in despite of them, I set on fire.
     ]From thence I cross'd the gulf call'd by the name
     Mare Majore of the inhabitants.
     Yet shall my soldiers make no period
     Until Natolia kneel before your feet.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Then will we triumph, banquet and carouse;
     Cooks shall have pensions to provide us cates,
     And glut us with the dainties of the world;
     Lachryma Christi and Calabrian wines
     Shall common soldiers drink in quaffing bowls,
     Ay, liquid gold, when we have conquer'd him, 61
     Mingled with coral and with orient 62 pearl.
     Come, let us banquet and carouse the whiles.
          [Exeunt.]




ACT II.





SCENE I.

          Enter SIGISMUND, FREDERICK, and BALDWIN, with their train.

     SIGISMUND.  Now say, my lords of Buda and Bohemia,
     What motion is it that inflames your thoughts,
     And stirs your valours to such sudden arms?

     FREDERICK.  Your majesty remembers, I am sure,
     What cruel slaughter of our Christian bloods
     These heathenish Turks and pagans lately made
     Betwixt the city Zula and Danubius;
     How through the midst of Varna and Bulgaria,
     And almost to the very walls of Rome,
     They have, not long since, massacred our camp.
     It resteth now, then, that your majesty
     Take all advantages of time and power,
     And work revenge upon these infidels.
     Your highness knows, for Tamburlaine's repair,
     That strikes a terror to all Turkish hearts,
     Natolia hath dismiss'd the greatest part
     Of all his army, pitch'd against our power
     Betwixt Cutheia and Orminius' mount,
     And sent them marching up to Belgasar,
     Acantha, Antioch, and Caesarea,
     To aid the kings of Soria 63 and Jerusalem.
     Now, then, my lord, advantage take thereof, 64
     And issue suddenly upon the rest;
     That, in the fortune of their overthrow,
     We may discourage all the pagan troop
     That dare attempt to war with Christians.

     SIGISMUND.  But calls not, then, your grace to memory
     The league we lately made with King Orcanes,
     Confirm'd by oath and articles of peace,
     And calling Christ for record of our truths?
     This should be treachery and violence
     Against the grace of our profession.

     BALDWIN.  No whit, my lord; for with such infidels,
     In whom no faith nor true religion rests,
     We are not bound to those accomplishments
     The holy laws of Christendom enjoin;
     But, as the faith which they profanely plight
     Is not by necessary policy
     To be esteem'd assurance for ourselves,
     So that we vow 65 to them should not infringe
     Our liberty of arms and victory.

     SIGISMUND.  Though I confess the oaths they undertake
     Breed little strength to our security,
     Yet those infirmities that thus defame
     Their faiths, 66 their honours, and religion, 67
     Should not give us presumption to the like.
     Our faiths are sound, and must be consummate, 68
     Religious, righteous, and inviolate.

     FREDERICK.  Assure your grace, 'tis superstition
     To stand so strictly on dispensive faith;
     And, should we lose the opportunity
     That God hath given to venge our Christians' death,
     And scourge their foul blasphemous paganism,
     As fell to Saul, to Balaam, and the rest,
     That would not kill and curse at God's command,
     So surely will the vengeance of the Highest,
     And jealous anger of his fearful arm,
     Be pour'd with rigour on our sinful heads,
     If we neglect this 69 offer'd victory.

     SIGISMUND.  Then arm, my lords, and issue suddenly,
     Giving commandment to our general host,
     With expedition to assail the pagan,
     And take the victory our God hath given.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter ORCANES, GAZELLUS, and URIBASSA, with their train.

     ORCANES.  Gazellus, Uribassa, and the rest,
     Now will we march from proud Orminius' mount
     To fair Natolia, where our neighbour kings
     Expect our power and our royal presence,
     T' encounter with the cruel Tamburlaine,
     That nigh Larissa sways a mighty host,
     And with the thunder of his martial 70 tools
     Makes earthquakes in the hearts of men and heaven.

     GAZELLUS.  And now come we to make his sinews shake
     With greater power than erst his pride hath felt.
     An hundred kings, by scores, will bid him arms,
     And hundred thousands subjects to each score:
     Which, if a shower of wounding thunderbolts
     Should break out of the bowels of the clouds,
     And fall as thick as hail upon our heads,
     In partial aid of that proud Scythian,
     Yet should our courages and steeled crests,
     And numbers, more than infinite, of men,
     Be able to withstand and conquer him.

     URIBASSA.  Methinks I see how glad the Christian king
     Is made for joy of our 71 admitted truce,
     That could not but before be terrified
     With 72 unacquainted power of our host.

          Enter a Messenger.

     MESSENGER.  Arm, dread sovereign, and my noble lords!
     The treacherous army of the Christians,
     Taking advantage of your slender power,
     Comes marching on us, and determines straight
     To bid us battle for our dearest lives.

     ORCANES.  Traitors, villains, damned Christians!
     Have I not here the articles of peace
     And solemn covenants we have both confirm'd,
     He by his Christ, and I by Mahomet?

     GAZELLUS.  Hell and confusion light upon their heads,
     That with such treason seek our overthrow,
     And care so little for their prophet Christ!

     ORCANES.  Can there be such deceit in Christians,
     Or treason in the fleshly heart of man,
     Whose shape is figure of the highest God?
     Then, if there be a Christ, as Christians say,
     But in their deeds deny him for their Christ,
     If he be son to everliving Jove,
     And hath the power of his outstretched arm,
     If he be jealous of his name and honour
     As is our holy prophet Mahomet,
     Take here these papers as our sacrifice
     And witness of thy servant's 73 perjury!
          [He tears to pieces the articles of peace.]
     Open, thou shining veil of Cynthia,
     And make a passage from th' empyreal heaven,
     That he that sits on high and never sleeps,
     Nor in one place is circumscriptible,
     But every where fills every continent
     With strange infusion of his sacred vigour,
     May, in his endless power and purity,
     Behold and venge this traitor's perjury!
     Thou, Christ, that art esteem'd omnipotent,
     If thou wilt prove thyself a perfect God,
     Worthy the worship of all faithful hearts,
     Be now reveng'd upon this traitor's soul,
     And make the power I have left behind
     (Too little to defend our guiltless lives)
     Sufficient to discomfit 74 and confound
     The trustless force of those false Christians!—
     To arms, my lords! 75 on Christ still let us cry:
     If there be Christ, we shall have victory.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Alarms of battle within.  Enter SIGISMUND wounded.

     SIGISMUND.  Discomfited is all the Christian 76 host,
     And God hath thunder'd vengeance from on high,
     For my accurs'd and hateful perjury.
     O just and dreadful punisher of sin,
     Let the dishonour of the pains I feel
     In this my mortal well-deserved wound
     End all my penance in my sudden death!
     And let this death, wherein to sin I die,
     Conceive a second life in endless mercy!
          [Dies.]

          Enter ORCANES, GAZELLUS, URIBASSA, with others.

     ORCANES.  Now lie the Christians bathing in their bloods,
     And Christ or Mahomet hath been my friend.

     GAZELLUS.  See, here the perjur'd traitor Hungary,
     Bloody and breathless for his villany!

     ORCANES.  Now shall his barbarous body be a prey
     To beasts and fowls, and all the winds shall breathe,
     Through shady leaves of every senseless tree,
     Murmurs and hisses for his heinous sin.
     Now scalds his soul in the Tartarian streams,
     And feeds upon the baneful tree of hell,
     That Zoacum, 77 that fruit of bitterness,
     That in the midst of fire is ingraff'd,
     Yet flourisheth, as Flora in her pride,
     With apples like the heads of damned fiends.
     The devils there, in chains of quenchless flame,
     Shall lead his soul, through Orcus' burning gulf,
     ]From pain to pain, whose change shall never end.
     What say'st thou yet, Gazellus, to his foil,
     Which we referr'd to justice of his Christ
     And to his power, which here appears as full
     As rays of Cynthia to the clearest sight?

     GAZELLUS.  'Tis but the fortune of the wars, my lord,
     Whose power is often prov'd a miracle.

     ORCANES.  Yet in my thoughts shall Christ be honoured,
     Not doing Mahomet an 78 injury,
     Whose power had share in this our victory;
     And, since this miscreant hath disgrac'd his faith,
     And died a traitor both to heaven and earth,
     We will both watch and ward shall keep his trunk 79
     Amidst these plains for fowls to prey upon.
     Go, Uribassa, give 80 it straight in charge.

     URIBASSA.  I will, my lord.
          [Exit.]

     ORCANES.  And now, Gazellus, let us haste and meet
     Our army, and our brother[s] of Jerusalem,
     Of Soria, 81 Trebizon, and Amasia,
     And happily, with full Natolian bowls
     Of Greekish wine, now let us celebrate
     Our happy conquest and his angry fate.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE IV.

          The arras is drawn, and ZENOCRATE is discovered lying
          in her bed of state; TAMBURLAINE sitting by her; three
          PHYSICIANS about her bed, tempering potions; her three
          sons, CALYPHAS, AMYRAS, and CELEBINUS; THERIDAMAS,
          TECHELLES, and USUMCASANE.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Black is the beauty of the brightest day;
     The golden ball of heaven's eternal fire,
     That danc'd with glory on the silver waves,
     Now wants the fuel that inflam'd his beams;
     And all with faintness, and for foul disgrace,
     He binds his temples with a frowning cloud,
     Ready to darken earth with endless night.
     Zenocrate, that gave him light and life,
     Whose eyes shot fire from their 82 ivory brows, 83
     And temper'd every soul with lively heat,
     Now by the malice of the angry skies,
     Whose jealousy admits no second mate,
     Draws in the comfort of her latest breath,
     All dazzled with the hellish mists of death.
     Now walk the angels on the walls of heaven,
     As sentinels to warn th' immortal souls
     To entertain divine Zenocrate:
     Apollo, Cynthia, and the ceaseless lamps
     That gently look'd upon this 84 loathsome earth,
     Shine downwards now no more, but deck the heavens
     To entertain divine Zenocrate:
     The crystal springs, whose taste illuminates
     Refined eyes with an eternal sight,
     Like tried silver run through Paradise
     To entertain divine Zenocrate:
     The cherubins and holy seraphins,
     That sing and play before the King of Kings,
     Use all their voices and their instruments
     To entertain divine Zenocrate;
     And, in this sweet and curious harmony,
     The god that tunes this music to our souls
     Holds out his hand in highest majesty
     To entertain divine Zenocrate.
     Then let some holy trance convey my thoughts
     Up to the palace of th' empyreal heaven,
     That this my life may be as short to me
     As are the days of sweet Zenocrate.—
     Physicians, will no 85 physic do her good?

     FIRST PHYSICIAN.  My lord, your majesty shall soon perceive,
     An if she pass this fit, the worst is past.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Tell me, how fares my fair Zenocrate?

     ZENOCRATE.  I fare, my lord, as other empresses,
     That, when this frail and 86 transitory flesh
     Hath suck'd the measure of that vital air
     That feeds the body with his dated health,
     Wane with enforc'd and necessary change.

     TAMBURLAINE.  May never such a change transform my love,
     In whose sweet being I repose my life!
     Whose heavenly presence, beautified with health,
     Gives light to Phoebus and the fixed stars;
     Whose absence makes 87 the sun and moon as dark
     As when, oppos'd in one diameter,
     Their spheres are mounted on the serpent's head,
     Or else descended to his winding train.
     Live still, my love, and so conserve my life,
     Or, dying, be the author 88 of my death.

     ZENOCRATE.  Live still, my lord; O, let my sovereign live!
     And sooner let the fiery element
     Dissolve, and make your kingdom in the sky,
     Than this base earth should shroud your majesty;
     For, should I but suspect your death by mine,
     The comfort of my future happiness,
     And hope to meet your highness in the heavens,
     Turn'd to despair, would break my wretched breast,
     And fury would confound my present rest.
     But let me die, my love; yes, 89 let me die;
     With love and patience let your true love die:
     Your grief and fury hurts my second life.
     Yet let me kiss my lord before I die,
     And let me die with kissing of my lord.
     But, since my life is lengthen'd yet a while,
     Let me take leave of these my loving sons,
     And of my lords, whose true nobility
     Have merited my latest memory.
     Sweet sons, farewell! in death resemble me,
     And in your lives your father's excellence. 90
     Some music, and my fit will cease, my lord.
          [They call for music.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Proud fury, and intolerable fit,
     That dares torment the body of my love,
     And scourge the scourge of the immortal God!
     Now are those spheres, where Cupid us'd to sit,
     Wounding the world with wonder and with love,
     Sadly supplied with pale and ghastly death,
     Whose darts do pierce the centre of my soul.
     Her sacred beauty hath enchanted heaven;
     And, had she liv'd before the siege of Troy,
     Helen, whose beauty summon'd Greece to arms,
     And drew a thousand ships to Tenedos,
     Had not been nam'd in Homer's Iliads,—
     Her name had been in every line he wrote;
     Or, had those wanton poets, for whose birth
     Old Rome was proud, but gaz'd a while on her,
     Nor Lesbia nor Corinna had been nam'd,—
     Zenocrate had been the argument
     Of every epigram or elegy.
          [The music sounds—ZENOCRATE dies.]
     What, is she dead?  Techelles, draw thy sword,
     And wound the earth, that it may cleave in twain,
     And we descend into th' infernal vaults,
     To hale the Fatal Sisters by the hair,
     And throw them in the triple moat of hell,
     For taking hence my fair Zenocrate.
     Casane and Theridamas, to arms!
     Raise cavalieros 91 higher than the clouds,
     And with the cannon break the frame of heaven;
     Batter the shining palace of the sun,
     And shiver all the starry firmament,
     For amorous Jove hath snatch'd my love from hence,
     Meaning to make her stately queen of heaven.
     What god soever holds thee in his arms,
     Giving thee nectar and ambrosia,
     Behold me here, divine Zenocrate,
     Raving, impatient, desperate, and mad,
     Breaking my steeled lance, with which I burst
     The rusty beams of Janus' temple-doors,
     Letting out Death and tyrannizing War,
     To march with me under this bloody flag!
     And, if thou pitiest Tamburlaine the Great,
     Come down from heaven, and live with me again!

     THERIDAMAS.  Ah, good my lord, be patient! she is dead,
     And all this raging cannot make her live.
     If words might serve, our voice hath rent the air;
     If tears, our eyes have water'd all the earth;
     If grief, our murder'd hearts have strain'd forth blood:
     Nothing prevails, 92 for she is dead, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  FOR SHE IS DEAD! thy words do pierce my soul:
     Ah, sweet Theridamas, say so no more!
     Though she be dead, yet let me think she lives,
     And feed my mind that dies for want of her.
     Where'er her soul be, thou [To the body] shalt stay with me,
     Embalm'd with cassia, ambergris, and myrrh,
     Not lapt in lead, but in a sheet of gold,
     And, till I die, thou shalt not be interr'd.
     Then in as rich a tomb as Mausolus' 93
     We both will rest, and have one 94 epitaph
     Writ in as many several languages
     As I have conquer'd kingdoms with my sword.
     This cursed town will I consume with fire,
     Because this place bereft me of my love;
     The houses, burnt, will look as if they mourn'd;
     And here will I set up her stature, 95
     And march about it with my mourning camp,
     Drooping and pining for Zenocrate.
          [The arras is drawn.]




ACT III.





SCENE I.

          Enter the KINGS OF TREBIZON and SORIA, 96 one bringing a
          sword and the other a sceptre; next, ORCANES king of
          Natolia, and the KING OF JERUSALEM with the imperial crown,
          after, CALLAPINE; and, after him, other LORDS and ALMEDA.
          ORCANES and the KING OF JERUSALEM crown CALLAPINE, and the
          others give him the sceptre.

     ORCANES.  Callapinus Cyricelibes, otherwise Cybelius, son and
     successive heir to the late mighty emperor Bajazeth, by the aid
     of God and his friend Mahomet, Emperor of Natolia, Jerusalem,
     Trebizon, Soria, Amasia, Thracia, Ilyria, Carmania, and all the
     hundred and thirty kingdoms late contributory to his mighty
     father,—long live Callapinus, Emperor of Turkey!

     CALLAPINE.  Thrice-worthy kings, of Natolia and the rest,
     I will requite your royal gratitudes
     With all the benefits my empire yields;
     And, were the sinews of th' imperial seat
     So knit and strengthen'd as when Bajazeth,
     My royal lord and father, fill'd the throne,
     Whose cursed fate 97 hath so dismember'd it,
     Then should you see this thief of Scythia,
     This proud usurping king of Persia,
     Do us such honour and supremacy,
     Bearing the vengeance of our father's wrongs,
     As all the world should blot his 98 dignities
     Out of the book of base-born infamies.
     And now I doubt not but your royal cares
     Have so provided for this cursed foe,
     That, since the heir of mighty Bajazeth
     (An emperor so honour'd for his virtues)
     Revives the spirits of all 99 true Turkish hearts,
     In grievous memory of his father's shame,
     We shall not need to nourish any doubt,
     But that proud Fortune, who hath follow'd long
     The martial sword of mighty Tamburlaine,
     Will now retain her old inconstancy,
     And raise our honours 100 to as high a pitch,
     In this our strong and fortunate encounter;
     For so hath heaven provided my escape
     ]From all the cruelty my soul sustain'd,
     By this my friendly keeper's happy means,
     That Jove, surcharg'd with pity of our wrongs,
     Will pour it down in showers on our heads,
     Scourging the pride of cursed Tamburlaine.

     ORCANES.  I have a hundred thousand men in arms;
     Some that, in conquest 101 of the perjur'd Christian,
     Being a handful to a mighty host,
     Think them in number yet sufficient
     To drink the river Nile or Euphrates,
     And for their power enow to win the world.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  And I as many from Jerusalem,
     Judaea, 102 Gaza, and Sclavonia's 103 bounds,
     That on mount Sinai, with their ensigns spread,
     Look like the parti-colour'd clouds of heaven
     That shew fair weather to the neighbour morn.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  And I as many bring from Trebizon,
     Chio, Famastro, and Amasia,
     All bordering on the Mare-Major-sea,
     Riso, Sancina, and the bordering towns
     That touch the end of famous Euphrates,
     Whose courages are kindled with the flames
     The cursed Scythian sets on all their towns,
     And vow to burn the villain's cruel heart.

     KING OF SORIA.  From Soria 104 with seventy thousand strong,
     Ta'en from Aleppo, Soldino, Tripoly,
     And so unto my city of Damascus, 105
     I march to meet and aid my neighbour kings;
     All which will join against this Tamburlaine,
     And bring him captive to your highness' feet.

     ORCANES.  Our battle, then, in martial manner pitch'd,
     According to our ancient use, shall bear
     The figure of the semicircled moon,
     Whose horns shell sprinkle through the tainted air
     The poison'd brains of this proud Scythian.

     CALLAPINE.  Well, then, my noble lords, for this my friend
     That freed me from the bondage of my foe,
     I think it requisite and honourable
     To keep my promise and to make him king,
     That is a gentleman, I know, at least.

     ALMEDA.  That's no matter, 106 sir, for being a king;
     or Tamburlaine came up of nothing.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Your majesty may choose some 'pointed time,
     Performing all your promise to the full;
     'Tis naught for your majesty to give a kingdom.

     CALLAPINE.  Then will I shortly keep my promise, Almeda.

     ALMEDA.  Why, I thank your majesty.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE and his three sons, CALYPHAS, AMYRAS, and
          CELEBINUS; USUMCASANE; four ATTENDANTS bearing the hearse of
          ZENOCRATE, and the drums sounding a doleful march; the town
          burning.

     TAMBURLAINE.  So burn the turrets of this cursed town,
     Flame to the highest region of the air,
     And kindle heaps of exhalations,
     That, being fiery meteors, may presage
     Death and destruction to the inhabitants!
     Over my zenith hang a blazing star,
     That may endure till heaven be dissolv'd,
     Fed with the fresh supply of earthly dregs,
     Threatening a dearth 107 and famine to this land!
     Flying dragons, lightning, fearful thunder-claps,
     Singe these fair plains, and make them seem as black
     As is the island where the Furies mask,
     Compass'd with Lethe, Styx, and Phlegethon,
     Because my dear Zenocrate is dead!

     CALYPHAS.  This pillar, plac'd in memory of her,
     Where in Arabian, Hebrew, Greek, is writ,
     THIS TOWN, BEING BURNT BY TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT,
     FORBIDS THE WORLD TO BUILD IT UP AGAIN.

     AMYRAS.  And here this mournful streamer shall be plac'd,
     Wrought with the Persian and th' 108 Egyptian arms,
     To signify she was a princess born,
     And wife unto the monarch of the East.

     CELEBINUS.  And here this table as a register
     Of all her virtues and perfections.

     TAMBURLAINE.  And here the picture of Zenocrate,
     To shew her beauty which the world admir'd;
     Sweet picture of divine Zenocrate,
     That, hanging here, will draw the gods from heaven,
     And cause the stars fix'd in the southern arc,
     (Whose lovely faces never any view'd
     That have not pass'd the centre's latitude,)
     As pilgrims travel to our hemisphere,
     Only to gaze upon Zenocrate.
     Thou shalt not beautify Larissa-plains,
     But keep within the circle of mine arms:
     At every town and castle I besiege,
     Thou shalt be set upon my royal tent;
     And, when I meet an army in the field,
     Those 109 looks will shed such influence in my camp,
     As if Bellona, goddess of the war,
     Threw naked swords and sulphur-balls of fire
     Upon the heads of all our enemies.—
     And now, my lords, advance your spears again;
     Sorrow no more, my sweet Casane, now:
     Boys, leave to mourn; this town shall ever mourn,
     Being burnt to cinders for your mother's death.

     CALYPHAS.  If I had wept a sea of tears for her,
     would not ease the sorrows 110 I sustain.

     AMYRAS.  As is that town, so is my heart consum'd
     With grief and sorrow for my mother's death.

     CELEBINUS.  My mother's death hath mortified my mind,
     And sorrow stops the passage of my speech.

     TAMBURLAINE.  But now, my boys, leave off, and list to me,
     That mean to teach you rudiments of war.
     I'll have you learn to sleep upon the ground,
     March in your armour thorough watery fens,
     Sustain the scorching heat and freezing cold,
     Hunger and thirst, 111 right adjuncts of the war;
     And, after this, to scale a castle-wall,
     Besiege a fort, to undermine a town,
     And make whole cities caper in the air:
     Then next, the way to fortify your men;
     In champion 112 grounds what figure serves you best,
     For which 113 the quinque-angle form is meet,
     Because the corners there may fall more flat
     Whereas 114 the fort may fittest be assail'd,
     And sharpest where th' assault is desperate:
     The ditches must be deep; the 115 counterscarps
     Narrow and steep; the walls made high and broad;
     The bulwarks and the rampires large and strong,
     With cavalieros 116 and thick counterforts,
     And room within to lodge six thousand men;
     It must have privy ditches, countermines,
     And secret issuings to defend the ditch;
     It must have high argins 117 and cover'd ways
     To keep the bulwark-fronts from battery,
     And parapets to hide the musketeers,
     Casemates to place the great 118 artillery,
     And store of ordnance, that from every flank
     May scour the outward curtains of the fort,
     Dismount the cannon of the adverse part,
     Murder the foe, and save the 119 walls from breach.
     When this is learn'd for service on the land,
     By plain and easy demonstration
     I'll teach you how to make the water mount,
     That you may dry-foot march through lakes and pools,
     Deep rivers, havens, creeks, and little seas,
     And make a fortress in the raging waves,
     Fenc'd with the concave of a monstrous rock,
     Invincible by nature 120 of the place.
     When this is done, then are ye soldiers,
     And worthy sons of Tamburlaine the Great.

     CALYPHAS.  My lord, but this is dangerous to be done;
     We may be slain or wounded ere we learn.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villain, art thou the son of Tamburlaine,
     And fear'st to die, or with a 121 curtle-axe
     To hew thy flesh, and make a gaping wound?
     Hast thou beheld a peal of ordnance strike
     A ring of pikes, mingled with shot and horse, 122
     Whose shatter'd limbs, being toss'd as high as heaven,
     Hang in the air as thick as sunny motes,
     And canst thou, coward, stand in fear of death?
     Hast thou not seen my horsemen charge the foe,
     Shot through the arms, cut overthwart the hands,
     Dying their lances with their streaming blood,
     And yet at night carouse within my tent,
     Filling their empty veins with airy wine,
     That, being concocted, turns to crimson blood,
     And wilt thou shun the field for fear of wounds?
     View me, thy father, that hath conquer'd kings,
     And, with his 123 host, march'd 124 round about the earth,
     Quite void of scars and clear from any wound,
     That by the wars lost not a drop 125 of blood,
     And see him lance 126 his flesh to teach you all.
          [He cuts his arm.]
     A wound is nothing, be it ne'er so deep;
     Blood is the god of war's rich livery.
     Now look I like a soldier, and this wound
     As great a grace and majesty to me,
     As if a chair of gold enamelled,
     Enchas'd with diamonds, sapphires, rubies,
     And fairest pearl of wealthy India,
     Were mounted here under a canopy,
     And I sat down, cloth'd with a massy robe
     That late adorn'd the Afric potentate,
     Whom I brought bound unto Damascus' walls.
     Come, boys, and with your fingers search my wound,
     And in my blood wash all your hands at once,
     While I sit smiling to behold the sight.
     Now, my boys, what think ye of a wound?

     CALYPHAS.  I know not 127 what I should think of it;
     methinks 'tis a pitiful sight.

     CELEBINUS.  'Tis 128 nothing.—Give me a wound, father.

     AMYRAS.  And me another, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Come, sirrah, give me your arm.

     CELEBINUS.  Here, father, cut it bravely, as you did your own.

     TAMBURLAINE.  It shall suffice thou dar'st abide a wound;
     My boy, thou shalt not lose a drop of blood
     Before we meet the army of the Turk;
     But then run desperate through the thickest throngs,
     Dreadless of blows, of bloody wounds, and death;
     And let the burning of Larissa-walls,
     My speech of war, and this my wound you see,
     Teach you, my boys, to bear courageous minds,
     Fit for the followers of great Tamburlaine.—
     Usumcasane, now come, let us march
     Towards Techelles and Theridamas,
     That we have sent before to fire the towns,
     The towers and cities of these hateful Turks,
     And hunt that coward faint-heart runaway,
     With that accursed 129 traitor Almeda,
     Till fire and sword have found them at a bay.

     USUMCASANE.  I long to pierce his 130 bowels with my sword,
     That hath betray'd my gracious sovereign,—
     That curs'd and damned traitor Almeda.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Then let us see if coward Callapine
     Dare levy arms against our puissance,
     That we may tread upon his captive neck,
     And treble all his father's slaveries.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, and their train.

     THERIDAMAS.  Thus have we march'd northward from Tamburlaine,
     Unto the frontier point 131 of Soria; 132
     And this is Balsera, their chiefest hold,
     Wherein is all the treasure of the land.

     TECHELLES.  Then let us bring our light artillery,
     Minions, falc'nets, and sakers, 133 to the trench,
     Filling the ditches with the walls' wide breach,
     And enter in to seize upon the hold.— 134
     How say you, soldiers, shall we not?

     SOLDIERS.  Yes, my lord, yes; come, let's about it.

     THERIDAMAS.  But stay a while; summon a parle, drum.
     It may be they will yield it quietly, 135
     Knowing two kings, the friends 136 to Tamburlaine,
     Stand at the walls with such a mighty power.
          [A parley sounded.—CAPTAIN appears on the walls,
           with OLYMPIA his wife, and his SON.]

     CAPTAIN.  What require you, my masters?

     THERIDAMAS.  Captain, that thou yield up thy hold to us.

     CAPTAIN.  To you! why, do you 137 think me weary of it?

     TECHELLES.  Nay, captain, thou art weary of thy life,
     If thou withstand the friends of Tamburlaine.

     THERIDAMAS.  These pioners 138 of Argier in Africa,
     Even in 139 the cannon's face, shall raise a hill
     Of earth and faggots higher than thy fort,
     And, over thy argins 140 and cover'd ways,
     Shall play upon the bulwarks of thy hold
     Volleys of ordnance, till the breach be made
     That with his ruin fills up all the trench;
     And, when we enter in, not heaven itself
     Shall ransom thee, thy wife, and family.

     TECHELLES.  Captain, these Moors shall cut the leaden pipes
     That bring fresh water to thy men and thee,
     And lie in trench before thy castle-walls,
     That no supply of victual shall come in,
     Nor [any] issue forth but they shall die;
     And, therefore, captain, yield it quietly. 141

     CAPTAIN.  Were you, that are the friends of Tamburlaine, 142
     Brothers of 143 holy Mahomet himself,
     I would not yield it; therefore do your worst:
     Raise mounts, batter, intrench, and undermine,
     Cut off the water, all convoys that can, 144
     Yet I am 145 resolute:  and so, farewell.
          [CAPTAIN, OLYMPIA, and SON, retire from the walls.]

     THERIDAMAS.  Pioners, away! and where I stuck the stake,
     Intrench with those dimensions I prescrib'd;
     Cast up the earth towards the castle-wall,
     Which, till it may defend you, labour low,
     And few or none shall perish by their shot.

     PIONERS.  We will, my lord.
          [Exeunt PIONERS.]

     TECHELLES.  A hundred horse shall scout about the plains,
     To spy what force comes to relieve the hold.
     Both we, Theridamas, will intrench our men,
     And with the Jacob's staff measure the height
     And distance of the castle from the trench,
     That we may know if our artillery
     Will carry full point-blank unto their walls.

     THERIDAMAS.  Then see the bringing of our ordnance
     Along the trench into 146 the battery,
     Where we will have gallions of six foot broad,
     To save our cannoneers from musket-shot;
     Betwixt which shall our ordnance thunder forth,
     And with the breach's fall, smoke, fire, and dust,
     The crack, the echo, and the soldiers' cry,
     Make deaf the air and dim the crystal sky.

     TECHELLES.  Trumpets and drums, alarum presently!
     And, soldiers, play the men; the hold 147 is yours!
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE IV.

          Alarms within.  Enter the CAPTAIN, with OLYMPIA, and his
          SON.

     OLYMPIA.  Come, good my lord, and let us haste from hence,
     Along the cave that leads beyond the foe:
     No hope is left to save this conquer'd hold.

     CAPTAIN.  A deadly bullet, gliding through my side,
     Lies heavy on my heart; I cannot live:
     I feel my liver pierc'd, and all my veins,
     That there begin and nourish every part,
     Mangled and torn, and all my entrails bath'd
     In blood that straineth 148 from their orifex.
     Farewell, sweet wife! sweet son, farewell! I die.
          [Dies.]

     OLYMPIA.  Death, whither art thou gone, that both we live?
     Come back again, sweet Death, and strike us both!
     One minute and our days, and one sepulchre
     Contain our bodies!  Death, why com'st thou not
     Well, this must be the messenger for thee:
          [Drawing a dagger.]
     Now, ugly Death, stretch out thy sable wings,
     And carry both our souls where his remains.—
     Tell me, sweet boy, art thou content to die?
     These barbarous Scythians, full of cruelty,
     And Moors, in whom was never pity found,
     Will hew us piecemeal, put us to the wheel,
     Or else invent some torture worse than that;
     Therefore die by thy loving mother's hand,
     Who gently now will lance thy ivory throat,
     And quickly rid thee both of pain and life.

     SON.  Mother, despatch me, or I'll kill myself;
     For think you I can live and see him dead?
     Give me your knife, good mother, or strike home: 149
     The Scythians shall not tyrannize on me:
     Sweet mother, strike, that I may meet my father.
          [She stabs him, and he dies.]

     OLYMPIA.  Ah, sacred Mahomet, if this be sin,
     Entreat a pardon of the God of heaven,
     And purge my soul before it come to thee!
          [She burns the bodies of her HUSBAND and SON,
           and then attempts to kill herself.]

          Enter THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and all their train.

     THERIDAMAS.  How now, madam! what are you doing?

     OLYMPIA.  Killing myself, as I have done my son,
     Whose body, with his father's, I have burnt,
     Lest cruel Scythians should dismember him.

     TECHELLES.  'Twas bravely done, and like a soldier's wife.
     Thou shalt with us to Tamburlaine the Great,
     Who, when he hears how resolute thou wert, 150
     Will match thee with a viceroy or a king.

     OLYMPIA.  My lord deceas'd was dearer unto me
     Than any viceroy, king, or emperor;
     And for his sake here will I end my days.

     THERIDAMAS.  But, lady, go with us to Tamburlaine,
     And thou shalt see a man greater than Mahomet,
     In whose high looks is much more majesty,
     Than from the concave superficies
     Of Jove's vast palace, the empyreal orb,
     Unto the shining bower where Cynthia sits,
     Like lovely Thetis, in a crystal robe;
     That treadeth Fortune underneath his feet,
     And makes the mighty god of arms his slave;
     On whom Death and the Fatal Sisters wait
     With naked swords and scarlet liveries;
     Before whom, mounted on a lion's back,
     Rhamnusia bears a helmet full of blood,
     And strows the way with brains of slaughter'd men;
     By whose proud side the ugly Furies run,
     Hearkening when he shall bid them plague the world;
     Over whose zenith, cloth'd in windy air,
     And eagle's wings join'd 151 to her feather'd breast,
     Fame hovereth, sounding of 152 her golden trump,
     That to the adverse poles of that straight line
     Which measureth the glorious frame of heaven
     The name of mighty Tamburlaine is spread;
     And him, fair lady, shall thy eyes behold.
     Come.

     OLYMPIA.  Take pity of a lady's ruthful tears,
     That humbly craves upon her knees to stay,
     And cast her body in the burning flame
     That feeds upon her son's and husband's flesh.

     TECHELLES.  Madam, sooner shall fire consume us both
     Than scorch a face so beautiful as this,
     In frame of which Nature hath shew'd more skill
     Than when she gave eternal chaos form,
     Drawing from it the shining lamps of heaven.

     THERIDAMAS.  Madam, I am so far in love with you,
     That you must go with us:  no remedy.

     OLYMPIA.  Then carry me, I care not, where you will,
     And let the end of this my fatal journey
     Be likewise end to my accursed life.

     TECHELLES.  No, madam, but the 153 beginning of your joy:
     Come willingly therefore.

     THERIDAMAS.  Soldiers, now let us meet the general,
     Who by this time is at Natolia,
     Ready to charge the army of the Turk.
     The gold and 154 silver, and the pearl, ye got,
     Rifling this fort, divide in equal shares:
     This lady shall have twice so much again
     Out of the coffers of our treasury.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE V.

          Enter CALLAPINE, ORCANES, the KINGS OF JERUSALEM, TREBIZON,
          and SORIA, with their train, ALMEDA, and a MESSENGER.

     MESSENGER.  Renowmed 155 emperor, mighty 156 Callapine,
     God's great lieutenant over all the world,
     Here at Aleppo, with an host of men,
     Lies Tamburlaine, this king of Persia,
     (In number more than are the 157 quivering leaves
     Of Ida's forest, where your highness' hounds
     With open cry pursue the wounded stag,)
     Who means to girt Natolia's walls with siege,
     Fire the town, and over-run the land.

     CALLAPINE.  My royal army is as great as his,
     That, from the bounds of Phrygia to the sea
     Which washeth Cyprus with his brinish waves,
     Covers the hills, the valleys, and the plains.
     Viceroys and peers of Turkey, play the men;
     Whet all your 158 swords to mangle Tamburlaine,
     His sons, his captains, and his followers:
     By Mahomet, not one of them shall live!
     The field wherein this battle shall be fought
     For ever term'd 159 the Persians' sepulchre,
     In memory of this our victory.

     ORCANES.  Now he that calls himself the 160 scourge of Jove,
     The emperor of the world, and earthly god,
     Shall end the warlike progress he intends,
     And travel headlong to the lake of hell,
     Where legions of devils (knowing he must die
     Here in Natolia by your 161 highness' hands),
     All brandishing their 162 brands of quenchless fire,
     Stretching their monstrous paws, grin with 163 their teeth,
     And guard the gates to entertain his soul.

     CALLAPINE.  Tell me, viceroys, the number of your men,
     And what our army royal is esteem'd.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  From Palestina and Jerusalem,
     Of Hebrews three score thousand fighting men
     Are come, since last we shew'd your 164 majesty.

     ORCANES.  So from Arabia Desert, and the bounds
     Of that sweet land whose brave metropolis
     Re-edified the fair Semiramis,
     Came forty thousand warlike foot and horse,
     Since last we number'd to your majesty.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  From Trebizon in Asia the Less,
     Naturaliz'd Turks and stout Bithynians
     Came to my bands, full fifty thousand more,
     (That, fighting, know not what retreat doth mean,
     Nor e'er return but with the victory,)
     Since last we number'd to your majesty.

     KING OF SORIA.  Of Sorians 165 from Halla is repair'd, 166
     And neighbour cities of your highness' land, 167
     Ten thousand horse, and thirty thousand foot,
     Since last we number'd to your majesty;
     So that the army royal is esteem'd
     Six hundred thousand valiant fighting men.

     CALLAPINE.  Then welcome, Tamburlaine, unto thy death!—
     Come, puissant viceroys, let us to the field
     (The Persians' sepulchre), and sacrifice
     Mountains of breathless men to Mahomet,
     Who now, with Jove, opens the firmament
     To see the slaughter of our enemies.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE with his three SONS, CALYPHAS, AMYRAS,
          and CELEBINUS; USUMCASANE, and others.

     TAMBURLAINE.  How now, Casane! see, a knot of kings,
     Sitting as if they were a-telling riddles!

     USUMCASANE.  My lord, your presence makes them pale and wan:
     Poor souls, they look as if their deaths were near.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Why, so he 168 is, Casane; I am here:
     But yet I'll save their lives, and make them slaves.—
     Ye petty kings of Turkey, I am come,
     As Hector did into the Grecian camp,
     To overdare the pride of Graecia,
     And set his warlike person to the view
     Of fierce Achilles, rival of his fame:
     I do you honour in the simile;
     For, if I should, as Hector did Achilles,
     (The worthiest knight that ever brandish'd sword,)
     Challenge in combat any of you all,
     I see how fearfully ye would refuse,
     And fly my glove as from a scorpion.

     ORCANES.  Now, thou art fearful of thy army's strength,
     Thou wouldst with overmatch of person fight:
     But, shepherd's issue, base-born Tamburlaine,
     Think of thy end; this sword shall lance thy throat.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villain, the shepherd's issue (at whose birth
     Heaven did afford a gracious aspect,
     And join'd those stars that shall be opposite
     Even till the dissolution of the world,
     And never meant to make a conqueror
     So famous as is 169 mighty Tamburlaine)
     Shall so torment thee, and that Callapine,
     That, like a roguish runaway, suborn'd
     That villain there, that slave, that Turkish dog,
     To false his service to his sovereign,
     As ye shall curse the birth of Tamburlaine.

     CALLAPINE.  Rail not, proud Scythian:  I shall now revenge
     My father's vile abuses and mine own.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  By Mahomet, he shall be tied in chains,
     Rowing with Christians in a brigandine
     About the Grecian isles to rob and spoil,
     And turn him to his ancient trade again:
     Methinks the slave should make a lusty thief.

     CALLAPINE.  Nay, when the battle ends, all we will meet,
     And sit in council to invent some pain
     That most may vex his body and his soul.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Sirrah Callapine, I'll hang a clog about
     your neck for running away again:  you shall not
     trouble me thus to come and fetch you.—
     But as for you, viceroy[s], you shall have bits,
     And, harness'd 170 like my horses, draw my coach;
     And, when ye stay, be lash'd with whips of wire:
     I'll have you learn to feed on 171 provender,
     And in a stable lie upon the planks.

     ORCANES.  But, Tamburlaine, first thou shalt 172 kneel to us,
     And humbly crave a pardon for thy life.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  The common soldiers of our mighty host
     Shall bring thee bound unto the 173 general's tent [.]

     KING OF SORIA.  And all have jointly sworn thy cruel death,
     Or bind thee in eternal torments' wrath.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, sirs, diet yourselves; you know I
     shall have occasion shortly to journey you.

     CELEBINUS.  See, father, how Almeda the jailor looks upon us!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villain, traitor, damned fugitive,
     I'll make thee wish the earth had swallow'd thee!
     See'st thou not death within my wrathful looks?
     Go, villain, cast thee headlong from a rock,
     Or rip thy bowels, and rent 174 out thy heart,
     T' appease my wrath; or else I'll torture thee,
     Searing thy hateful flesh with burning irons
     And drops of scalding lead, while all thy joints
     Be rack'd and beat asunder with the wheel;
     For, if thou liv'st, not any element
     Shall shroud thee from the wrath of Tamburlaine.

     CALLAPINE.  Well, in despite of thee, he shall be king.—
     Come, Almeda; receive this crown of me:
     I here invest thee king of Ariadan,
     Bordering on Mare Roso, near to Mecca.

     ORCANES.  What! take it, man.

     ALMEDA.  [to Tamb.] Good my lord, let me take it.

     CALLAPINE.  Dost thou ask him leave? here; take it.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Go to, sirrah! 175 take your crown, and make up
     the half dozen.  So, sirrah, now you are a king, you must give
     arms. 176

     ORCANES.  So he shall, and wear thy head in his scutcheon.

     TAMBURLAINE.  No; 177 let him hang a bunch of keys on his
     standard, to put him in remembrance he was a jailor, that,
     when I take him, I may knock out his brains with them,
     and lock you in the stable, when you shall come sweating
     from my chariot.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  Away! let us to the field, that the villain
     may be slain.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Sirrah, prepare whips, and bring my chariot
     to my tent; for, as soon as the battle is done, I'll ride
     in triumph through the camp.
          Enter THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and their train.
     How now, ye petty kings? lo, here are bugs 178
     Will make the hair stand upright on your heads,
     And cast your crowns in slavery at their feet!—
     Welcome, Theridamas and Techelles, both:
     See ye this rout, 179 and know ye this same king?

     THERIDAMAS.  Ay, my lord; he was Callapine's keeper.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, now ye see he is a king.  Look to him,
     Theridamas, when we are fighting, lest he hide his crown
     as the foolish king of Persia did. 180

     KING OF SORIA.  No, Tamburlaine; he shall not be put
     to that exigent, I warrant thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.  You know not, sir.—
     But now, my followers and my loving friends,
     Fight as you ever did, like conquerors,
     The glory of this happy day is yours.
     My stern aspect 181 shall make fair Victory,
     Hovering betwixt our armies, light on me,
     Loaden with laurel-wreaths to crown us all.

     TECHELLES.  I smile to think how, when this field is fought
     And rich Natolia ours, our men shall sweat
     With carrying pearl and treasure on their backs.

     TAMBURLAINE.  You shall be princes all, immediately.—
     Come, fight, ye Turks, or yield us victory.

     ORCANES.  No; we will meet thee, slavish Tamburlaine.
          [Exeunt severally.]




ACT IV.





SCENE I.

          Alarms within.  AMYRAS and CELEBINUS issue from the tent
          where CALYPHAS sits asleep. 182

     AMYRAS.  Now in their glories shine the golden crowns
     Of these proud Turks, much like so many suns
     That half dismay the majesty of heaven.
     Now, brother, follow we our father's sword,
     That flies with fury swifter than our thoughts,
     And cuts down armies with his conquering wings.

     CELEBINUS.  Call forth our lazy brother from the tent,
     For, if my father miss him in the field,
     Wrath, kindled in the furnace of his breast,
     Will send a deadly lightning to his heart.

     AMYRAS.  Brother, ho! what, given so much to sleep,
     You cannot 183 leave it, when our enemies' drums
     And rattling cannons thunder in our ears
     Our proper ruin and our father's foil?

     CALYPHAS.  Away, ye fools! my father needs not me,
     Nor you, in faith, but that you will be thought
     More childish-valourous than manly-wise.
     If half our camp should sit and sleep with me,
     My father were enough to scare 184 the foe:
     You do dishonour to his majesty,
     To think our helps will do him any good.

     AMYRAS.  What, dar'st thou, then, be absent from the fight,
     Knowing my father hates thy cowardice,
     And oft hath warn'd thee to be still in field,
     When he himself amidst the thickest troops
     Beats down our foes, to flesh our taintless swords?

     CALYPHAS.  I know, sir, what it is to kill a man;
     It works remorse of conscience in me.
     I take no pleasure to be murderous,
     Nor care for blood when wine will quench my thirst.

     CELEBINUS.  O cowardly boy! fie, for shame, come forth!
     Thou dost dishonour manhood and thy house.

     CALYPHAS.  Go, go, tall 185 stripling, fight you for us both,
     And take my other toward brother here,
     For person like to prove a second Mars.
     'Twill please my mind as well to hear, both you 186
     Have won a heap of honour in the field,
     And left your slender carcasses behind,
     As if I lay with you for company.

     AMYRAS.  You will not go, then?

     CALYPHAS.  You say true.

     AMYRAS.  Were all the lofty mounts of Zona Mundi
     That fill the midst of farthest Tartary
     Turn'd into pearl and proffer'd for my stay,
     I would not bide the fury of my father,
     When, made a victor in these haughty arms,
     He comes and finds his sons have had no shares
     In all the honours he propos'd for us.

     CALYPHAS.  Take you the honour, I will take my ease;
     My wisdom shall excuse my cowardice:
     I go into the field before I need!
          [Alarms within.  AMYRAS and CELEBINUS run out.]
     The bullets fly at random where they list;
     And, should I 187 go, and kill a thousand men,
     I were as soon rewarded with a shot,
     And sooner far than he that never fights;
     And, should I go, and do no harm nor good,
     I might have harm, which all the good I have,
     Join'd with my father's crown, would never cure.
     I'll to cards.—Perdicas!

          Enter PERDICAS.

     PERDICAS.  Here, my lord.

     CALYPHAS.
     Come, thou and I will go to cards to drive away the time.

     PERDICAS.  Content, my lord:  but what shall we play for?

     CALYPHAS.  Who shall kiss the fairest of the Turks' concubines
     first, when my father hath conquered them.

     PERDICAS.  Agreed, i'faith.
          [They play.]

     CALYPHAS.  They say I am a coward, Perdicas, and I fear
     as little their taratantaras, their swords, or their cannons
     as I do a naked lady in a net of gold, and, for fear I should be
     afraid, would put it off and come to bed with me.

     PERDICAS.  Such a fear, my lord, would never make ye retire.

     CALYPHAS.  I would my father would let me be put in the front
     of such a battle once, to try my valour!  [Alarms within.]
     What a coil they keep!  I believe there will be some hurt done
     anon amongst them.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE;
          AMYRAS and CELEBINUS leading in ORCANES, and the KINGS
          OF JERUSALEM, TREBIZON, and SORIA; and SOLDIERS.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     See now, ye 188 slaves, my children stoop your pride, 189
     And lead your bodies 190 sheep-like to the sword!—
     Bring them, my boys, and tell me if the wars
     Be not a life that may illustrate gods,
     And tickle not your spirits with desire
     Still to be train'd in arms and chivalry?

     AMYRAS.  Shall we let go these kings again, my lord,
     To gather greater numbers 'gainst our power,
     That they may say, it is not chance doth this,
     But matchless strength and magnanimity?

     TAMBURLAINE.  No, no, Amyras; tempt not Fortune so:
     Cherish thy valour still with fresh supplies,
     And glut it not with stale and daunted foes.
     But where's this coward villain, not my son,
     But traitor to my name and majesty?
          [He goes in and brings CALYPHAS out.]
     Image of sloth, and picture of a slave,
     The obloquy and scorn of my renown!
     How may my heart, thus fired with mine 191 eyes,
     Wounded with shame and kill'd with discontent,
     Shroud any thought may 192 hold my striving hands
     ]From martial justice on thy wretched soul?

     THERIDAMAS.  Yet pardon him, I pray your majesty.

     TECHELLES and USUMCASANE.
     Let all of us entreat your highness' pardon.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Stand up, 193 ye base, unworthy soldiers!
     Know ye not yet the argument of arms?

     AMYRAS.  Good my lord, let him be forgiven for once, 194
     And we will force him to the field hereafter.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Stand up, my boys, and I will teach ye arms,
     And what the jealousy of wars must do.—
     O Samarcanda, where I breathed first,
     And joy'd the fire of this martial 195 flesh,
     Blush, blush, fair city, at thine 196 honour's foil,
     And shame of nature, which 197 Jaertis' 198 stream,
     Embracing thee with deepest of his love,
     Can never wash from thy distained brows!—
     Here, Jove, receive his fainting soul again;
     A form not meet to give that subject essence
     Whose matter is the flesh of Tamburlaine,
     Wherein an incorporeal 199 spirit moves,
     Made of the mould whereof thyself consists,
     Which makes me valiant, proud, ambitious,
     Ready to levy power against thy throne,
     That I might move the turning spheres of heaven;
     For earth and all this airy region
     Cannot contain the state of Tamburlaine.
          [Stabs CALYPHAS.]
     By Mahomet, thy mighty friend, I swear,
     In sending to my issue such a soul,
     Created of the massy dregs of earth,
     The scum and tartar of the elements,
     Wherein was neither courage, strength, or wit,
     But folly, sloth, and damned idleness,
     Thou hast procur'd a greater enemy
     Than he that darted mountains at thy head,
     Shaking the burden mighty Atlas bears,
     Whereat thou trembling hidd'st thee in the air,
     Cloth'd with a pitchy cloud for being seen.— 200
     And now, ye canker'd curs of Asia,
     That will not see the strength of Tamburlaine,
     Although it shine as brightly as the sun,
     Now you shall 201 feel the strength of Tamburlaine,
     And, by the state of his supremacy,
     Approve 202 the difference 'twixt himself and you.

     ORCANES.  Thou shew'st the difference 'twixt ourselves and thee,
     In this thy barbarous damned tyranny.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Thy victories are grown so violent,
     That shortly heaven, fill'd with the meteors
     Of blood and fire thy tyrannies have made,
     Will pour down blood and fire on thy head,
     Whose scalding drops will pierce thy seething brains,
     And, with our bloods, revenge our bloods 203 on thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villains, these terrors, and these tyrannies
     (If tyrannies war's justice ye repute),
     I execute, enjoin'd me from above,
     To scourge the pride of such as Heaven abhors;
     Nor am I made arch-monarch of the world,
     Crown'd and invested by the hand of Jove,
     For deeds of bounty or nobility;
     But, since I exercise a greater name,
     The scourge of God and terror of the world,
     I must apply myself to fit those terms,
     In war, in blood, in death, in cruelty,
     And plague such peasants 204 as resist in 205 me
     The power of Heaven's eternal majesty.—
     Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane, 206
     Ransack the tents and the pavilions
     Of these proud Turks, and take their concubines,
     Making them bury this effeminate brat;
     For not a common soldier shall defile
     His manly fingers with so faint a boy:
     Then bring those Turkish harlots to my tent,
     And I'll dispose them as it likes me best.—
     Meanwhile, take him in.

     SOLDIERS.  We will, my lord.
          [Exeunt with the body of CALYPHAS.]

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  O damned monster! nay, a fiend of hell,
     Whose cruelties are not so harsh as thine,
     Nor yet impos'd with such a bitter hate!

     ORCANES.  Revenge it, 207 Rhadamanth and Aeacus,
     And let your hates, extended in his pains,
     Excel 208 the hate wherewith he pains our souls!

     KING OF TREBIZON.  May never day give virtue to his eyes,
     Whose sight, compos'd of fury and of fire,
     Doth send such stern affections to his heart!

     KING OF SORIA.  May never spirit, vein, or artier, 209 feed
     The cursed substance of that cruel heart;
     But, wanting moisture and remorseful 210 blood,
     Dry up with anger, and consume with heat!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, bark, ye dogs:  I'll bridle all your tongues,
     And bind them close with bits of burnish'd steel,
     Down to the channels of your hateful throats;
     And, with the pains my rigour shall inflict,
     I'll make ye roar, that earth may echo forth
     The far-resounding torments ye sustain;
     As when an herd of lusty Cimbrian bulls
     Run mourning round about the females' miss, 211
     And, stung with fury of their following,
     Fill all the air with troublous bellowing.
     I will, with engines never exercis'd,
     Conquer, sack, and utterly consume
     Your cities and your golden palaces,
     And, with the flames that beat against the clouds,
     Incense the heavens, and make the stars to melt,
     As if they were the tears of Mahomet
     For hot consumption of his country's pride;
     And, till by vision or by speech I hear
     Immortal Jove say "Cease, my Tamburlaine,"
     I will persist a terror to the world,
     Making the meteors (that, like armed men,
     Are seen to march upon the towers of heaven)
     Run tilting round about the firmament,
     And break their burning lances in the air,
     For honour of my wondrous victories.—
     Come, bring them in to our pavilion.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter OLYMPIA.

     OLYMPIA.  Distress'd Olympia, whose weeping eyes,
     Since thy arrival here, behold 212 no sun,
     But, clos'd within the compass of a 213 tent,
     Have 214 stain'd thy cheeks, and made thee look like death,
     Devise some means to rid thee of thy life,
     Rather than yield to his detested suit,
     Whose drift is only to dishonour thee;
     And, since this earth, dew'd with thy brinish tears,
     Affords no herbs whose taste may poison thee,
     Nor yet this air, beat often with thy sighs,
     Contagious smells and vapours to infect thee,
     Nor thy close cave a sword to murder thee,
     Let this invention be the instrument.

          Enter THERIDAMAS.

     THERIDAMAS.  Well met, Olympia:  I sought thee in my tent,
     But, when I saw the place obscure and dark,
     Which with thy beauty thou wast wont to light,
     Enrag'd, I ran about the fields for thee,
     Supposing amorous Jove had sent his son,
     The winged Hermes, to convey thee hence;
     But now I find thee, and that fear is past,
     Tell me, Olympia, wilt thou grant my suit?

     OLYMPIA.  My lord and husband's death, with my sweet son's,
     (With whom I buried all affections
     Save grief and sorrow, which torment my heart,)
     Forbids my mind to entertain a thought
     That tends to love, but meditate on death,
     A fitter subject for a pensive soul.

     THERIDAMAS.  Olympia, pity him in whom thy looks
     Have greater operation and more force
     Than Cynthia's in the watery wilderness;
     For with thy view my joys are at the full,
     And ebb again as thou depart'st from me.

     OLYMPIA.  Ah, pity me, my lord, and draw your sword,
     Making a passage for my troubled soul,
     Which beats against this prison to get out,
     And meet my husband and my loving son!

     THERIDAMAS.  Nothing but still thy husband and thy son?
     Leave this, my love, and listen more to me:
     Thou shalt be stately queen of fair Argier;
     And, cloth'd in costly cloth of massy gold,
     Upon the marble turrets of my court
     Sit like to Venus in her chair of state,
     Commanding all thy princely eye desires;
     And I will cast off arms to 215 sit with thee,
     Spending my life in sweet discourse of love.

     OLYMPIA.  No such discourse is pleasant in 216 mine ears,
     But that where every period ends with death,
     And every line begins with death again:
     I cannot love, to be an emperess.

     THERIDAMAS.  Nay, lady, then, if nothing will prevail,
     I'll use some other means to make you yield:
     Such is the sudden fury of my love,
     I must and will be pleas'd, and you shall yield:
     Come to the tent again.

     OLYMPIA.  Stay now, my lord; and, will you 217 save my honour,
     I'll give your grace a present of such price
     As all the world can not afford the like.

     THERIDAMAS.  What is it?

     OLYMPIA.  An ointment which a cunning alchymist
     Distilled from the purest balsamum
     And simplest extracts of all minerals,
     In which the essential form of marble stone,
     Temper'd by science metaphysical,
     And spells of magic from the mouths 218 of spirits,
     With which if you but 'noint your tender skin,
     Nor pistol, sword, nor lance, can pierce your flesh.

     THERIDAMAS.  Why, madam, think you to mock me thus palpably?

     OLYMPIA.  To prove it, I will 'noint my naked throat,
     Which when you stab, look on your weapon's point,
     And you shall see't rebated 219 with the blow.

     THERIDAMAS.  Why gave you not your husband some of it,
     If you lov'd him, and it so precious?

     OLYMPIA.  My purpose was, my lord, to spend it so,
     But was prevented by his sudden end;
     And for a present easy proof thereof, 220
     That I dissemble not, try it on me.

     THERIDAMAS.  I will, Olympia, and will 221 keep it for
     The richest present of this eastern world.
          [She anoints her throat. 222]

     OLYMPIA.  Now stab, my lord, and mark your weapon's point,
     That will be blunted if the blow be great.

     THERIDAMAS.  Here, then, Olympia.—
          [Stabs her.]
     What, have I slain her?  Villain, stab thyself!
     Cut off this arm that at murdered my 223 love,
     In whom the learned Rabbis of this age
     Might find as many wondrous miracles
     As in the theoria of the world!
     Now hell is fairer than Elysium; 224
     A greater lamp than that bright eye of heaven,
     ]From whence the stars do borrow 225 all their light,
     Wanders about the black circumference;
     And now the damned souls are free from pain,
     For every Fury gazeth on her looks;
     Infernal Dis is courting of my love,
     Inventing masks and stately shows for her,
     Opening the doors of his rich treasury
     To entertain this queen of chastity;
     Whose body shall be tomb'd with all the pomp
     The treasure of my 226 kingdom may afford.
          [Exit with the body.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, drawn in his chariot by the KINGS OF
          TREBIZON and SORIA, 227 with bits in their mouths,
          reins in his 228 left hand, and in his right hand a whip
          with which he scourgeth them; AMYRAS, CELEBINUS, TECHELLES,
          THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE; ORCANES king of Natolia, and the
          KING OF JERUSALEM, led by five 229 or six common SOLDIERS;
          and other SOLDIERS.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Holla, ye pamper'd jades of Asia! 230
     What, can ye draw but twenty miles a-day,
     And have so proud a chariot at your heels,
     And such a coachman as great Tamburlaine,
     But from Asphaltis, where I conquer'd you,
     To Byron here, where thus I honour you?
     The horse that guide the golden eye of heaven,
     And blow the morning from their nostrils, 231
     Making their fiery gait above the clouds,
     Are not so honour'd in 232 their governor
     As you, ye slaves, in mighty Tamburlaine.
     The headstrong jades of Thrace Alcides tam'd,
     That King Aegeus fed with human flesh,
     And made so wanton that they knew their strengths,
     Were not subdu'd with valour more divine
     Than you by this unconquer'd arm of mine.
     To make you fierce, and fit my appetite,
     You shall be fed with flesh as raw as blood,
     And drink in pails the strongest muscadel:
     If you can live with it, then live, and draw
     My chariot swifter than the racking 233 clouds;
     If not, then die like beasts, and fit for naught
     But perches for the black and fatal ravens.
     Thus am I right the scourge of highest Jove;
     And see the figure of my dignity,
     By which I hold my name and majesty!

     AMYRAS.  Let me have coach, 234 my lord, that I may ride,
     And thus be drawn by 235 these two idle kings.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thy youth forbids such ease, my kingly boy:
     They shall to-morrow draw my chariot,
     While these their fellow-kings may be refresh'd.

     ORCANES.  O thou that sway'st the region under earth,
     And art a king as absolute as Jove,
     Come as thou didst in fruitful Sicily,
     Surveying all the glories of the land,
     And as thou took'st the fair Proserpina,
     Joying the fruit of Ceres' garden-plot, 236
     For love, for honour, and to make her queen,
     So, for just hate, for shame, and to subdue
     This proud contemner of thy dreadful power,
     Come once in fury, and survey his pride,
     Haling him headlong to the lowest hell!

     THERIDAMAS.  Your majesty must get some bits for these,
     To bridle their contemptuous cursing tongues,
     That, like unruly never-broken jades,
     Break through the hedges of their hateful mouths,
     And pass their fixed bounds exceedingly.

     TECHELLES.  Nay, we will break the hedges of their mouths,
     And pull their kicking colts 237 out of their pastures.

     USUMCASANE.  Your majesty already hath devis'd
     A mean, as fit as may be, to restrain
     These coltish coach-horse tongues from blasphemy.

     CELEBINUS.  How like you that, sir king? why speak you not?

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Ah, cruel brat, sprung from a tyrant's loins!
     How like his cursed father he begins
     To practice taunts and bitter tyrannies!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Ay, Turk, I tell thee, this same 238 boy is he
     That must (advanc'd in higher pomp than this)
     Rifle the kingdoms I shall leave unsack'd,
     If Jove, esteeming me too good for earth,
     Raise me, to match 239 the fair Aldeboran,
     Above 240 the threefold astracism of heaven,
     Before I conquer all the triple world.—
     Now fetch me out the Turkish concubines:
     I will prefer them for the funeral
     They have bestow'd on my abortive son.
          [The CONCUBINES are brought in.]
     Where are my common soldiers now, that fought
     So lion-like upon Asphaltis' plains?

     SOLDIERS.  Here, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Hold ye, tall 241 soldiers, take ye queens a-piece,—
     I mean such queens as were kings' concubines;
     Take them; divide them, and their 242 jewels too,
     And let them equally serve all your turns.

     SOLDIERS.  We thank your majesty.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Brawl not, I warn you, for your lechery;
     For every man that so offends shall die.

     ORCANES.  Injurious tyrant, wilt thou so defame
     The hateful fortunes of thy victory,
     To exercise upon such guiltless dames
     The violence of thy common soldiers' lust?

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Live continent, 243 then, ye slaves, and meet not me
     With troops of harlots at your slothful heels.

     CONCUBINES.  O, pity us, my lord, and save our honours!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Are ye not gone, ye villains, with your spoils?
          [The SOLDIERS run away with the CONCUBINES.]

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  O, merciless, infernal cruelty!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Save your honours! 'twere but time indeed,
     Lost long before ye knew what honour meant.

     THERIDAMAS.  It seems they meant to conquer us, my lord,
     And make us jesting pageants for their trulls.

     TAMBURLAINE.  And now themselves shall make our pageant,
     And common soldiers jest 244 with all their trulls.
     Let them take pleasure soundly in their spoils,
     Till we prepare our march to Babylon,
     Whither we next make expedition.

     TECHELLES.  Let us not be idle, then, my lord,
     But presently be prest 245 to conquer it.

     TAMBURLAINE.  We will, Techelles.—Forward, then, ye jades!
     Now crouch, ye kings of greatest Asia,
     And tremble, when ye hear this scourge will come
     That whips down cities and controlleth crowns,
     Adding their wealth and treasure to my store.
     The Euxine sea, north to Natolia;
     The Terrene, 246 west; the Caspian, north northeast;
     And on the south, Sinus Arabicus;
     Shall all 247 be loaden with the martial spoils
     We will convey with us to Persia.
     Then shall my native city Samarcanda,
     And crystal waves of fresh Jaertis' 248 stream,
     The pride and beauty of her princely seat,
     Be famous through the furthest 249 continents;
     For there my palace royal shall be plac'd,
     Whose shining turrets shall dismay the heavens,
     And cast the fame of Ilion's tower to hell:
     Thorough 250 the streets, with troops of conquer'd kings,
     I'll ride in golden armour like the sun;
     And in my helm a triple plume shall spring,
     Spangled with diamonds, dancing in the air,
     To note me emperor of the three-fold world;
     Like to an almond-tree 251 y-mounted 252 high
     Upon the lofty and celestial mount
     Of ever-green Selinus, 253 quaintly deck'd
     With blooms more white than Erycina's 254 brows, 255
     Whose tender blossoms tremble every one
     At every little breath that thorough heaven 256 is blown.
     Then in my coach, like Saturn's royal son
     Mounted his shining chariot 257 gilt with fire,
     And drawn with princely eagles through the path
     Pav'd with bright crystal and enchas'd with stars,
     When all the gods stand gazing at his pomp,
     So will I ride through Samarcanda-streets,
     Until my soul, dissever'd from this flesh,
     Shall mount the milk-white way, and meet him there.
     To Babylon, my lords, to Babylon!
          [Exeunt.]




ACT V.





SCENE I.

          Enter the GOVERNOR OF BABYLON, MAXIMUS, and others, upon
          the walls.

     GOVERNOR.  What saith Maximus?

     MAXIMUS.  My lord, the breach the enemy hath made
     Gives such assurance of our overthrow,
     That little hope is left to save our lives,
     Or hold our city from the conqueror's hands.
     Then hang out 258 flags, my lord, of humble truce,
     And satisfy the people's general prayers,
     That Tamburlaine's intolerable wrath
     May be suppress'd by our submission.

     GOVERNOR.  Villain, respect'st thou 259 more thy slavish life
     Than honour of thy country or thy name?
     Is not my life and state as dear to me,
     The city and my native country's weal,
     As any thing of 260 price with thy conceit?
     Have we not hope, for all our batter'd walls,
     To live secure and keep his forces out,
     When this our famous lake of Limnasphaltis
     Makes walls a-fresh with every thing that falls
     Into the liquid substance of his stream,
     More strong than are the gates of death or hell?
     What faintness should dismay our courages,
     When we are thus defenc'd against our foe,
     And have no terror but his threatening looks?

          Enter, above, a CITIZEN, who kneels to the GOVERNOR.

     CITIZEN.  My lord, if ever you did deed of ruth,
     And now will work a refuge to our lives,
     Offer submission, hang up flags of truce,
     That Tamburlaine may pity our distress,
     And use us like a loving conqueror.
     Though this be held his last day's dreadful siege,
     Wherein he spareth neither man nor child,
     Yet are there Christians of Georgia here,
     Whose state he 261 ever pitied and reliev'd,
     Will get his pardon, if your grace would send.

     GOVERNOR.  How 262 is my soul environed!
     And this eterniz'd 263 city Babylon
     Fill'd with a pack of faint-heart fugitives
     That thus entreat their shame and servitude!

          Enter, above, a SECOND CITIZEN.

     SECOND CITIZEN.  My lord, if ever you will win our hearts,
     Yield up the town, and 264 save our wives and children;
     For I will cast myself from off these walls,
     Or die some death of quickest violence,
     Before I bide the wrath of Tamburlaine.

     GOVERNOR.  Villains, cowards, traitors to our state!
     Fall to the earth, and pierce the pit of hell,
     That legions of tormenting spirits may vex
     Your slavish bosoms with continual pains!
     I care not, nor the town will never yield
     As long as any life is in my breast.

          Enter THERIDAMAS and TECHELLES, with SOLDIERS.

     THERIDAMAS.  Thou desperate governor of Babylon,
     To save thy life, and us a little labour,
     Yield speedily the city to our hands,
     Or else be sure thou shalt be forc'd with pains
     More exquisite than ever traitor felt.

     GOVERNOR.  Tyrant, I turn the traitor in thy throat,
     And will defend it in despite of thee.—
     Call up the soldiers to defend these walls.

     TECHELLES.  Yield, foolish governor; we offer more
     Than ever yet we did to such proud slaves
     As durst resist us till our third day's siege.
     Thou seest us prest 265 to give the last assault,
     And that shall bide no more regard of parle. 266

     GOVERNOR.  Assault and spare not; we will never yield.
          [Alarms:  and they scale the walls.]

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, drawn in his chariot (as before) by the
          KINGS OF TREBIZON and SORIA; AMYRAS, CELEBINUS, USUMCASANE;
          ORCANES king of Natolia, and the KING OF JERUSALEM, led by
          SOLDIERS; 267 and others.

     TAMBURLAINE.  The stately buildings of fair Babylon,
     Whose lofty pillars, higher than the clouds,
     Were wont to guide the seaman in the deep,
     Being carried thither by the cannon's force,
     Now fill the mouth of Limnasphaltis' lake,
     And make a bridge unto the batter'd walls.
     Where Belus, Ninus, and great Alexander
     Have rode in triumph, triumphs Tamburlaine,
     Whose chariot-wheels have burst 268 th' Assyrians' bones,
     Drawn with these kings on heaps of carcasses.
     Now in the place, where fair Semiramis,
     Courted by kings and peers of Asia,
     Hath trod the measures, 269 do my soldiers march;
     And in the streets, where brave Assyrian dames
     Have rid in pomp like rich Saturnia,
     With furious words and frowning visages
     My horsemen brandish their unruly blades.
          Re-enter THERIDAMAS and TECHELLES, bringing in the
          GOVERNOR OF BABYLON.
     Who have ye there, my lords?

     THERIDAMAS.  The sturdy governor of Babylon,
     That made us all the labour for the town,
     And us'd such slender reckoning of 270 your majesty.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Go, bind the villain; he shall hang in chains
     Upon the ruins of this conquer'd town.—
     Sirrah, the view of our vermilion tents
     (Which threaten'd more than if the region
     Next underneath the element of fire
     Were full of comets and of blazing stars,
     Whose flaming trains should reach down to the earth)
     Could not affright you; no, nor I myself,
     The wrathful messenger of mighty Jove,
     That with his sword hath quail'd all earthly kings,
     Could not persuade you to submission,
     But still the ports 271 were shut:  villain, I say,
     Should I but touch the rusty gates of hell,
     The triple-headed Cerberus would howl,
     And make 272 black Jove to crouch and kneel to me;
     But I have sent volleys of shot to you,
     Yet could not enter till the breach was made.

     GOVERNOR.  Nor, if my body could have stopt the breach,
     Shouldst thou have enter'd, cruel Tamburlaine.
     'Tis not thy bloody tents can make me yield,
     Nor yet thyself, the anger of the Highest;
     For, though thy cannon shook the city-walls, 273
     My heart did never quake, or courage faint.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, now I'll make it quake.—Go draw him 274 up,
     Hang him in 275 chains upon the city-walls,
     And let my soldiers shoot the slave to death.

     GOVERNOR.  Vile monster, born of some infernal hag,
     And sent from hell to tyrannize on earth,
     Do all thy worst; nor death, nor Tamburlaine,
     Torture, or pain, can daunt my dreadless mind.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Up with him, then! his body shall be scar'd. 276

     GOVERNOR.  But, Tamburlaine, in Limnasphaltis' lake
     There lies more gold than Babylon is worth,
     Which, when the city was besieg'd, I hid:
     Save but my life, and I will give it thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Then, for all your valour, you would save your life?
     Whereabout lies it?

     GOVERNOR.  Under a hollow bank, right opposite
     Against the western gate of Babylon.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Go thither, some of you, and take his gold:—
          [Exeunt some ATTENDANTS.]
     The rest forward with execution.
     Away with him hence, let him speak no more.—
     I think I make your courage something quail.—
          [Exeunt ATTENDANTS with the GOVERNOR or BABYLON.]
     When this is done, we'll march from Babylon,
     And make our greatest haste to Persia.
     These jades are broken-winded and half-tir'd;
     Unharness them, and let me have fresh horse.
          [ATTENDANTS unharness the KINGS or TREBIZON and SORIA]
     So; now their best is done to honour me,
     Take them and hang them both up presently.

     KING OF TREBIZON.
     Vile 277 tyrant! barbarous bloody Tamburlaine!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Take them away, Theridamas; see them despatch'd.

     THERIDAMAS.  I will, my lord.
          [Exit with the KINGS or TREBIZON and SORIA.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Come, Asian viceroys; to your tasks a while,
     And take such fortune as your fellows felt.

     ORCANES.  First let thy Scythian horse tear both our limbs,
     Rather than we should draw thy chariot,
     And, like base slaves, abject our princely minds
     To vile and ignominious servitude.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Rather lend me thy weapon, Tamburlaine,
     That I may sheathe it in this breast of mine.
     A thousand deaths could not torment our hearts
     More than the thought of this doth vex our souls.

     AMYRAS.
     They will talk still, my lord, if you do not bridle them.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Bridle them, and let me to my coach.

          [ATTENDANTS bridle ORCANES king of Natolia, and the
          KING OF JERUSALEM, and harness them to the chariot.—
          The GOVERNOR OF BABYLON appears hanging in chains
          on the walls.—Re-enter THERIDAMAS.]

     AMYRAS.  See, now, my lord, how brave the captain hangs!

     TAMBURLAINE.  'Tis brave indeed, my boy:—well done!—
     Shoot first, my lord, and then the rest shall follow.

     THERIDAMAS.  Then have at him, to begin withal.
          [THERIDAMAS shoots at the GOVERNOR.]

     GOVERNOR.  Yet save my life, and let this wound appease
     The mortal fury of great Tamburlaine!

     TAMBURLAINE.  No, though Asphaltis' lake were liquid gold,
     And offer'd me as ransom for thy life,
     Yet shouldst thou die.—Shoot at him all at once.
          [They shoot.]
     So, now he hangs like Bagdet's 278 governor,
     Having as many bullets in his flesh
     As there be breaches in her batter'd wall.
     Go now, and bind the burghers hand and foot,
     And cast them headlong in the city's lake.
     Tartars and Persians shall inhabit there;
     And, to command the city, I will build
     A citadel, 279 that all Africa,
     Which hath been subject to the Persian king,
     Shall pay me tribute for in Babylon.

     TECHELLES.
     What shall be done with their wives and children, my lord?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Techelles, drown them all, man, woman, and child;
     Leave not a Babylonian in the town.

     TECHELLES.  I will about it straight.—Come, soldiers.
          [Exit with SOLDIERS.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now, Casane, where's the Turkish Alcoran,
     And all the heaps of superstitious books
     Found in the temples of that Mahomet
     Whom I have thought a god? they shall be burnt.

     USUMCASANE.  Here they are, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well said! 280 let there be a fire presently.
          [They light a fire.]
     In vain, I see, men worship Mahomet:
     My sword hath sent millions of Turks to hell,
     Slew all his priests, his kinsmen, and his friends,
     And yet I live untouch'd by Mahomet.
     There is a God, full of revenging wrath,
     ]From whom the thunder and the lightning breaks,
     Whose scourge I am, and him will I 281 obey.
     So, Casane; fling them in the fire.—
          [They burn the books.]
     Now, Mahomet, if thou have any power,
     Come down thyself and work a miracle:
     Thou art not worthy to be worshipped
     That suffer'st 282 flames of fire to burn the writ
     Wherein the sum of thy religion rests:
     Why send'st 283 thou not a furious whirlwind down,
     To blow thy Alcoran up to thy throne,
     Where men report thou sitt'st 284 by God himself?
     Or vengeance on the head 285 of Tamburlaine
     That shakes his sword against thy majesty,
     And spurns the abstracts of thy foolish laws?—
     Well, soldiers, Mahomet remains in hell;
     He cannot hear the voice of Tamburlaine:
     Seek out another godhead to adore;
     The God that sits in heaven, if any god,
     For he is God alone, and none but he.

          Re-enter TECHELLES.

     TECHELLES.  I have fulfill'd your highness' will, my lord:
     Thousands of men, drown'd in Asphaltis' lake,
     Have made the water swell above the banks,
     And fishes, fed 286 by human carcasses,
     Amaz'd, swim up and down upon 287 the waves,
     As when they swallow assafoetida,
     Which makes them fleet 288 aloft and gape 289 for air.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, then, my friendly lords, what now remains,
     But that we leave sufficient garrison,
     And presently depart to Persia,
     To triumph after all our victories?

     THERIDAMAS.  Ay, good my lord, let us in 290 haste to Persia;
     And let this captain be remov'd the walls
     To some high hill about the city here.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Let it be so;—about it, soldiers;—
     But stay; I feel myself distemper'd suddenly.

     TECHELLES.  What is it dares distemper Tamburlaine?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Something, Techelles; but I know not what.—
     But, forth, ye vassals! 291 whatsoe'er 292 it be,
     Sickness or death can never conquer me.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter CALLAPINE, KING OF AMASIA, a CAPTAIN, and train,
          with drums and trumpets.

     CALLAPINE.  King of Amasia, now our mighty host
     Marcheth in Asia Major, where the streams
     Of Euphrates 293 and Tigris swiftly run;
     And here may we 294 behold great Babylon,
     Circled about with Limnasphaltis' lake,
     Where Tamburlaine with all his army lies,
     Which being faint and weary with the siege,
     We may lie ready to encounter him
     Before his host be full from Babylon,
     And so revenge our latest grievous loss,
     If God or Mahomet send any aid.

     KING OF AMASIA.  Doubt not, my lord, but we shall conquer him:
     The monster that hath drunk a sea of blood,
     And yet gapes still for more to quench his thirst,
     Our Turkish swords shall headlong send to hell;
     And that vile carcass, drawn by warlike kings,
     The fowls shall eat; for never sepulchre
     Shall grace this 295 base-born tyrant Tamburlaine.

     CALLAPINE.  When I record 296 my parents' slavish life,
     Their cruel death, mine own captivity,
     My viceroys' bondage under Tamburlaine,
     Methinks I could sustain a thousand deaths,
     To be reveng'd of all his villany.—
     Ah, sacred Mahomet, thou that hast seen
     Millions of Turks perish by Tamburlaine,
     Kingdoms made waste, brave cities sack'd and burnt,
     And but one host is left to honour thee,
     Aid 297 thy obedient servant Callapine,
     And make him, after all these overthrows,
     To triumph over cursed Tamburlaine!

     KING OF AMASIA.  Fear not, my lord:  I see great Mahomet,
     Clothed in purple clouds, and on his head
     A chaplet brighter than Apollo's crown,
     Marching about the air with armed men,
     To join with you against this Tamburlaine.

     CAPTAIN.  Renowmed 298 general, mighty Callapine,
     Though God himself and holy Mahomet
     Should come in person to resist your power,
     Yet might your mighty host encounter all,
     And pull proud Tamburlaine upon his knees
     To sue for mercy at your highness' feet.

     CALLAPINE.  Captain, the force of Tamburlaine is great,
     His fortune greater, and the victories
     Wherewith he hath so sore dismay'd the world
     Are greatest to discourage all our drifts;
     Yet, when the pride of Cynthia is at full,
     She wanes again; and so shall his, I hope;
     For we have here the chief selected men
     Of twenty several kingdoms at the least;
     Nor ploughman, priest, nor merchant, stays at home;
     All Turkey is in arms with Callapine;
     And never will we sunder camps and arms
     Before himself or his be conquered:
     This is the time that must eternize me
     For conquering the tyrant of the world.
     Come, soldiers, let us lie in wait for him,
     And, if we find him absent from his camp,
     Or that it be rejoin'd again at full,
     Assail it, and be sure of victory.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and USUMCASANE.

     THERIDAMAS.  Weep, heavens, and vanish into liquid tears!
     Fall, stars that govern his nativity,
     And summon all the shining lamps of heaven
     To cast their bootless fires to the earth,
     And shed their feeble influence in the air;
     Muffle your beauties with eternal clouds;
     For Hell and Darkness pitch their pitchy tents,
     And Death, with armies of Cimmerian spirits,
     Gives battle 'gainst the heart of Tamburlaine!
     Now, in defiance of that wonted love
     Your sacred virtues pour'd upon his throne,
     And made his state an honour to the heavens,
     These cowards invisibly 299 assail his soul,
     And threaten conquest on our sovereign;
     But, if he die, your glories are disgrac'd,
     Earth droops, and says that hell in heaven is plac'd!

     TECHELLES.  O, then, ye powers that sway eternal seats,
     And guide this massy substance of the earth,
     If you retain desert of holiness,
     As your supreme estates instruct our thoughts,
     Be not inconstant, careless of your fame,
     Bear not the burden of your enemies' joys,
     Triumphing in his fall whom you advanc'd;
     But, as his birth, life, health, and majesty
     Were strangely blest and governed by heaven,
     So honour, heaven, (till heaven dissolved be,)
     His birth, his life, his health, and majesty!

     USUMCASANE.  Blush, heaven, to lose the honour of thy name,
     To see thy footstool set upon thy head;
     And let no baseness in thy haughty breast
     Sustain a shame of such inexcellence, 300
     To see the devils mount in angels' thrones,
     And angels dive into the pools of hell!
     And, though they think their painful date is out,
     And that their power is puissant as Jove's,
     Which makes them manage arms against thy state,
     Yet make them feel the strength of Tamburlaine
     (Thy instrument and note of majesty)
     Is greater far than they can thus subdue;
     For, if he die, thy glory is disgrac'd,
     Earth droops, and says that hell in heaven is plac'd!

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, 301 drawn in his chariot (as before)
          by ORCANES king of Natolia, and the KING OF JERUSALEM,
          AMYRAS, CELEBINUS, and Physicians.

     TAMBURLAINE.  What daring god torments my body thus,
     And seeks to conquer mighty Tamburlaine?
     Shall sickness prove me now to be a man,
     That have been term'd the terror of the world?
     Techelles and the rest, come, take your swords,
     And threaten him whose hand afflicts my soul:
     Come, let us march against the powers of heaven,
     And set black streamers in the firmament,
     To signify the slaughter of the gods.
     Ah, friends, what shall I do? I cannot stand.
     Come, carry me to war against the gods,
     That thus envy the health of Tamburlaine.

     THERIDAMAS.  Ah, good my lord, leave these impatient words,
     Which add much danger to your malady!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Why, shall I sit and languish in this pain?
     No, strike the drums, and, in revenge of this,
     Come, let us charge our spears, and pierce his breast
     Whose shoulders bear the axis of the world,
     That, if I perish, heaven and earth may fade.
     Theridamas, haste to the court of Jove;
     Will him to send Apollo hither straight,
     To cure me, or I'll fetch him down myself.

     TECHELLES.
     Sit still, my gracious lord; this grief will cease, 302
     And cannot last, it is so violent.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Not last, Techelles! no, for I shall die.
     See, where my slave, the ugly monster Death,
     Shaking and quivering, pale and wan for fear,
     Stands aiming at me with his murdering dart,
     Who flies away at every glance I give,
     And, when I look away, comes stealing on!—
     Villain, away, and hie thee to the field!
     I and mine army come to load thy back
     With souls of thousand mangled carcasses.—
     Look, where he goes! but, see, he comes again,
     Because I stay!  Techelles, let us march,
     And weary Death with bearing souls to hell.

     FIRST PHYSICIAN.  Pleaseth your majesty to drink this potion,
     Which will abate the fury of your fit,
     And cause some milder spirits govern you.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Tell me what think you of my sickness now?

     FIRST PHYSICIAN.  I view'd your urine, and the hypostasis, 303
     Thick and obscure, doth make your danger great:
     Your veins are full of accidental heat,
     Whereby the moisture of your blood is dried:
     The humidum and calor, which some hold
     Is not a parcel of the elements,
     But of a substance more divine and pure,
     Is almost clean extinguished and spent;
     Which, being the cause of life, imports your death:
     Besides, my lord, this day is critical,
     Dangerous to those whose crisis is as yours:
     Your artiers, 304 which alongst the veins convey
     The lively spirits which the heart engenders,
     Are parch'd and void of spirit, that the soul,
     Wanting those organons by which it moves,
     Cannot endure, by argument of art.
     Yet, if your majesty may escape this day,
     No doubt but you shall soon recover all.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Then will I comfort all my vital parts,
     And live, in spite of death, above a day.
          [Alarms within.]

          Enter a Messenger.

     MESSENGER.  My lord, young Callapine, that lately fled
     from your majesty, hath now gathered a fresh army, and,
     hearing your absence in the field, offers to set upon 305 us
     presently.

     TAMBURLAINE.  See, my physicians, now, how Jove hath sent
     A present medicine to recure my pain!
     My looks shall make them fly; and, might I follow,
     There should not one of all the villain's power
     Live to give offer of another fight.

     USUMCASANE.  I joy, my lord, your highness is so strong,
     That can endure so well your royal presence,
     Which only will dismay the enemy.

     TAMBURLAINE.  I know it will, Casane.—Draw, you slaves!
     In spite of death, I will go shew my face.
          [Alarms.  Exit TAMBURLAINE with all the rest (except the
          PHYSICIANS), and re-enter presently.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thus are the villain cowards 306 fled for fear,
     Like summer's vapours vanish'd by the sun;
     And, could I but a while pursue the field,
     That Callapine should be my slave again.
     But I perceive my martial strength is spent:
     In vain I strive and rail against those powers
     That mean t' invest me in a higher throne,
     As much too high for this disdainful earth.
     Give me a map; then let me see how much
     Is left for me to conquer all the world,
     That these, my boys, may finish all my wants.
          [One brings a map.]
     Here I began to march towards Persia,
     Along Armenia and the Caspian Sea,
     And thence unto 307 Bithynia, where I took
     The Turk and his great empress prisoners.
     Then march'd I into Egypt and Arabia;
     And here, not far from Alexandria,
     Whereas 308 the Terrene 309 and the Red Sea meet,
     Being distant less than full a hundred leagues,
     I meant to cut a channel to them both,
     That men might quickly sail to India.
     ]From thence to Nubia near Borno-lake,
     And so along the Aethiopian sea,
     Cutting the tropic line of Capricorn,
     I conquer'd all as far as Zanzibar.
     Then, by the northern part of Africa,
     I came at last to Graecia, and from thence
     To Asia, where I stay against my will;
     Which is from Scythia, where I first began, 310
     Backward[s] and forwards near five thousand leagues.
     Look here, my boys; see, what a world of ground
     Lies westward from the midst of Cancer's line
     Unto the rising of this 311 earthly globe,
     Whereas the sun, declining from our sight,
     Begins the day with our Antipodes!
     And shall I die, and this unconquered?
     Lo, here, my sons, are all the golden mines,
     Inestimable drugs and precious stones,
     More worth than Asia and the world beside;
     And from th' Antarctic Pole eastward behold
     As much more land, which never was descried,
     Wherein are rocks of pearl that shine as bright
     As all the lamps that beautify the sky!
     And shall I die, and this unconquered?
     Here, lovely boys; what death forbids my life,
     That let your lives command in spite of death.

     AMYRAS.  Alas, my lord, how should our bleeding hearts,
     Wounded and broken with your highness' grief,
     Retain a thought of joy or spark of life?
     Your soul gives essence to our wretched subjects, 312
     Whose matter is incorporate in your flesh.

     CELEBINUS.  Your pains do pierce our souls; no hope survives,
     For by your life we entertain our lives.

     TAMBURLAINE.  But, sons, this subject, not of force enough
     To hold the fiery spirit it contains,
     Must part, imparting his impressions
     By equal portions into 313 both your breasts;
     My flesh, divided in your precious shapes,
     Shall still retain my spirit, though I die,
     And live in all your seeds 314 immortally.—
     Then now remove me, that I may resign
     My place and proper title to my son.—
     First, take my scourge and my imperial crown,
     And mount my royal chariot of estate,
     That I may see thee crown'd before I die.—
     Help me, my lords, to make my last remove.
          [They assist TAMBURLAINE to descend from the chariot.]

     THERIDAMAS.  A woful change, my lord, that daunts our thoughts
     More than the ruin of our proper souls!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Sit up, my son, [and] let me see how well
     Thou wilt become thy father's majesty.

     AMYRAS.  With what a flinty bosom should I joy
     The breath of life and burden of my soul,
     If not resolv'd into resolved pains,
     My body's mortified lineaments 315
     Should exercise the motions of my heart,
     Pierc'd with the joy of any dignity!
     O father, if the unrelenting ears
     Of Death and Hell be shut against my prayers,
     And that the spiteful influence of Heaven
     Deny my soul fruition of her joy,
     How should I step, or stir my hateful feet
     Against the inward powers of my heart,
     Leading a life that only strives to die,
     And plead in vain unpleasing sovereignty!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Let not thy love exceed thine honour, son,
     Nor bar thy mind that magnanimity
     That nobly must admit necessity.
     Sit up, my boy, and with these 316 silken reins
     Bridle the steeled stomachs of these 317 jades.

     THERIDAMAS.  My lord, you must obey his majesty,
     Since fate commands and proud necessity.

     AMYRAS.  Heavens witness me with what a broken heart
          [Mounting the chariot.]
     And damned 318 spirit I ascend this seat,
     And send my soul, before my father die,
     His anguish and his burning agony!
          [They crown AMYRAS.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now fetch the hearse of fair Zenocrate;
     Let it be plac'd by this my fatal chair,
     And serve as parcel of my funeral.

     USUMCASANE.  Then feels your majesty no sovereign ease,
     Nor may our hearts, all drown'd in tears of blood,
     Joy any hope of your recovery?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Casane, no; the monarch of the earth,
     And eyeless monster that torments my soul,
     Cannot behold the tears ye shed for me,
     And therefore still augments his cruelty.

     TECHELLES.  Then let some god oppose his holy power
     Against the wrath and tyranny of Death,
     That his tear-thirsty and unquenched hate
     May be upon himself reverberate!
          [They bring in the hearse of ZENOCRATE.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now, eyes, enjoy your latest benefit,
     And, when my soul hath virtue of your sight,
     Pierce through the coffin and the sheet of gold,
     And glut your longings with a heaven of joy.
     So, reign, my son; scourge and control those slaves,
     Guiding thy chariot with thy father's hand.
     As precious is the charge thou undertak'st
     As that which Clymene's 319 brain-sick son did guide,
     When wandering Phoebe's 320 ivory cheeks were scorch'd,
     And all the earth, like Aetna, breathing fire:
     Be warn'd by him, then; learn with awful eye
     To sway a throne as dangerous as his;
     For, if thy body thrive not full of thoughts
     As pure and fiery as Phyteus' 321 beams,
     The nature of these proud rebelling jades
     Will take occasion by the slenderest hair,
     And draw thee 322 piecemeal, like Hippolytus,
     Through rocks more steep and sharp than Caspian cliffs: 323
     The nature of thy chariot will not bear
     A guide of baser temper than myself,
     More than heaven's coach the pride of Phaeton.
     Farewell, my boys! my dearest friends, farewell!
     My body feels, my soul doth weep to see
     Your sweet desires depriv'd my company,
     For Tamburlaine, the scourge of God, must die.
          [Dies.]

     AMYRAS.  Meet heaven and earth, and here let all things end,
     For earth hath spent the pride of all her fruit,
     And heaven consum'd his choicest living fire!
     Let earth and heaven his timeless death deplore,
     For both their worths will equal him no more!
          [Exeunt.]

FIRST SESTIAD

On Hellespont, guilty of true-love's blood,
In view and opposite two cities stood,
Sea-borderers, disjoined by Neptune's might;
The one Abydos, the other Sestos hight.
At Sestos Hero dwelt; Hero the fair,
Whom young Apollo courted for her hair,
And offered as a dower his burning throne,
Where she should sit for men to gaze upon.
The outside of her garments were of lawn,
The lining purple silk, with gilt stars drawn;
Her wide sleeves green, and bordered with a grove,
Where Venus in her naked glory strove
To please the careless and disdainful eyes
Of proud Adonis, that before her lies.
Her kirtle blue, whereon was many a stain,
Made with the blood of wretched lovers slain.
Upon her head she ware a myrtle wreath,
From whence her veil reached to the ground beneath.
Her veil was artificial flowers and leaves
Whose workmanship both man and beast deceives.
Many would praise the sweet smell as she passed,
When 'twas the odour which her breath forth cast;
And there for honey bees have sought in vain,
And, beat from thence, have lighted there again.
About her neck hung chains of pebblestone,
Which, lightened by her neck, like diamonds shone.
She ware no gloves; for neither sun nor wind
Would burn or parch her hands, but to her mind,
Or warm or cool them, for they took delight
To play upon those hands, they were so white.
Buskins of shells, all silvered used she,
And branched with blushing coral to the knee;
Where sparrows perched of hollow pearl and gold,
Such as the world would wonder to behold.
Those with sweet water oft her handmaid fills,
Which, as she went, would chirrup through the bills.
Some say for her the fairest Cupid pined
And looking in her face was strooken blind.
But this is true: so like was one the other,
As he imagined Hero was his mother.
And oftentimes into her bosom flew,
About her naked neck his bare arms threw,
And laid his childish head upon her breast,
And, with still panting rocked, there took his rest.
So lovely fair was Hero, Venus' nun,
As Nature wept, thinking she was undone,
Because she took more from her than she left,
And of such wondrous beauty her bereft.
Therefore, in sign her treasure suffered wrack,
Since Hero's time hath half the world been black.

Amorous Leander, beautiful and young,
(whose tragedy divine Musaeus sung,)
Dwelt at Abydos; since him dwelt there none
For whom succeeding times make greater moan.
His dangling tresses, that were never shorn,
Had they been cut, and unto Colchos borne,
Would have allured the vent'rous youth of Greece
To hazard more than for the golden fleece.
Fair Cynthia wished his arms might be her sphere;
Grief makes her pale, because she moves not there.
His body was as straight as Circe's wand;
Jove might have sipped out nectar from his hand.
Even as delicious meat is to the taste,
So was his neck in touching, and surpassed
The white of Pelop's shoulder. I could tell ye
How smooth his breast was and how white his belly;
And whose immortal fingers did imprint
That heavenly path with many a curious dint
That runs along his back, but my rude pen
Can hardly blazon forth the loves of men,
Much less of powerful gods. Let it suffice
That my slack Muse sings of Leander's eyes,
Those orient cheeks and lips, exceeding his
That leaped into the water for a kiss
Of his own shadow and, despising many,
Died ere he could enjoy the love of any.
Had wild Hippolytus Leander seen
Enamoured of his beauty had he been.
His presence made the rudest peasant melt
That in the vast uplandish country dwelt.
The barbarous Thracian soldier, moved with nought,
Was moved with him and for his favour sought.
Some swore he was a maid in man's attire,
For in his looks were all that men desire,
A pleasant smiling cheek, a speaking eye,
A brow for love to banquet royally;
And such as knew he was a man, would say,
"Leander, thou art made for amorous play.
Why art thou not in love, and loved of all?
Though thou be fair, yet be not thine own thrall."

The men of wealthy Sestos every year,
(For his sake whom their goddess held so dear,
Rose-cheeked Adonis) kept a solemn feast.
Thither resorted many a wandering guest
To meet their loves.
Such as had none at all,
Came lovers home from this great festival.
For every street like to a firmament
Glistered with breathing stars who, where they went,
Frighted the melancholy earth which deemed
Eternal heaven to burn, for so it seemed,
As if another Phaeton had got
The guidance of the sun's rich chariot.
But far above the loveliest Hero shined
And stole away th' enchanted gazer's mind,
For like sea nymphs' enveigling Harmony,
So was her beauty to the standers by.
Nor that night-wandering, pale, and wat'ry star
(When yawning dragons draw her thirling car
From Latmus' mount up to the gloomy sky
Where, crowned with blazing light and majesty,
She proudly sits) more overrules the flood
Than she the hearts of those that near her stood.
Even as, when gaudy nymphs pursue the chase,
Wretched Ixion's shaggy footed race,
Incensed with savage heat, gallop amain
From steep pine-bearing mountains to the plain.
So ran the people forth to gaze upon her,
And all that viewed her were enamoured on her.
And as in fury of a dreadful fight,
Their fellows being slain or put to flight,
Poor soldiers stand with fear of death dead strooken,
So at her presence all surprised and tooken,
Await the sentence of her scornful eyes.
He whom she favours lives, the other dies.
There might you see one sigh, another rage;
And some, (their violent passions to assuage)
Compile sharp satires, but alas too late,
For faithful love will never turn to hate.
And many seeing great princes were denied
Pin'd as they went, and thinking on her died.
On this feast day, O cursed day and hour,
Went Hero thorough Sestos from her tower
To Venus' temple, where unhappily
As after chanced, they did each other spy.

So fair a church as this had Venus none.
The walls were of discoloured jasper stone
Wherein was Proteus carved, and o'erhead
A lively vine of green sea agate spread,
Where by one hand lightheaded Bacchus hung,
And, with the other, wine from grapes out wrung.
Of crystal shining fair the pavement was.
The town of Sestos called it Venus' glass.
There might you see the gods in sundry shapes
Committing heady riots, incest, rapes.
For know, that underneath this radiant floor
Was Danae's statue in a brazen tower,
Jove slyly stealing from his sister's bed,
To dally with Idalian Ganymede,
And for his love Europa bellowing loud,
And tumbling with the Rainbow in a cloud;
Blood quaffing Mars heaving the iron net
Which limping Vulcan and his Cyclops set;
Love kindling fire to burn such towns as Troy;
Sylvanus weeping for the lovely boy
That now is turned into a cypress tree,
Under whose shade the wood gods love to be.
And in the midst a silver altar stood.
There Hero, sacrificing turtle's blood,
Vailed to the ground, vailing her eyelids close,
And modestly they opened as she rose.
Thence flew Love's arrow with the golden head,
And thus Leander was enamoured.
Stone still he stood, and evermore he gazed
Till with the fire that from his countenance blazed
Relenting Hero's gentle heart was strook.
Such force and virtue hath an amorous look.

It lies not in our power to love or hate,
For will in us is overruled by fate.
When two are stripped, long ere the course begin
We wish that one should lose, the other win.
And one especially do we affect
Of two gold ingots like in each respect.
The reason no man knows; let it suffice
What we behold is censured by our eyes.
Where both deliberate, the love is slight:
Who ever loved, that loved not at first sight?

He kneeled, but unto her devoutly prayed.
Chaste Hero to herself thus softly said,
"Were I the saint he worships, I would hear him;"
And, as she spake those words, came somewhat near him.
He started up, she blushed as one ashamed,
Wherewith Leander much more was inflamed.
He touched her hand; in touching it she trembled.
Love deeply grounded, hardly is dissembled.
These lovers parleyed by the touch of hands;
True love is mute, and oft amazed stands.
Thus while dumb signs their yielding hearts entangled,
The air with sparks of living fire was spangled,
And night, deep drenched in misty Acheron,
Heaved up her head, and half the world upon
Breathed darkness forth (dark night is Cupid's day).
And now begins Leander to display
Love's holy fire, with words, with sighs, and tears,
Which like sweet music entered Hero's ears,
And yet at every word she turned aside,
And always cut him off as he replied.
At last, like to a bold sharp sophister,
With cheerful hope thus he accosted her.
"Fair creature, let me speak without offence.
I would my rude words had the influence
To lead thy thoughts as thy fair looks do mine,
Then shouldst thou be his prisoner, who is thine.
Be not unkind and fair; misshapen stuff
Are of behaviour boisterous and rough.
O shun me not, but hear me ere you go.
God knows I cannot force love as you do.
My words shall be as spotless as my youth,
Full of simplicity and naked truth.
This sacrifice, (whose sweet perfume descending
From Venus' altar, to your footsteps bending)
Doth testify that you exceed her far,
To whom you offer, and whose nun you are.
Why should you worship her? Her you surpass
As much as sparkling diamonds flaring glass.
A diamond set in lead his worth retains;
A heavenly nymph, beloved of human swains,
Receives no blemish, but ofttimes more grace;
Which makes me hope, although I am but base:
Base in respect of thee, divine and pure,
Dutiful service may thy love procure.
And I in duty will excel all other,
As thou in beauty dost exceed Love's mother.
Nor heaven, nor thou, were made to gaze upon,
As heaven preserves all things, so save thou one.
A stately builded ship, well rigged and tall,
The ocean maketh more majestical.
Why vowest thou then to live in Sestos here
Who on Love's seas more glorious wouldst appear?
Like untuned golden strings all women are,
Which long time lie untouched, will harshly jar.
Vessels of brass, oft handled, brightly shine.
What difference betwixt the richest mine
And basest mould, but use? For both, not used,
Are of like worth. Then treasure is abused
When misers keep it; being put to loan,
In time it will return us two for one.
Rich robes themselves and others do adorn;
Neither themselves nor others, if not worn.
Who builds a palace and rams up the gate
Shall see it ruinous and desolate.
Ah, simple Hero, learn thyself to cherish.
Lone women like to empty houses perish.
Less sins the poor rich man that starves himself
In heaping up a mass of drossy pelf,
Than such as you. His golden earth remains
Which, after his decease, some other gains.
But this fair gem, sweet in the loss alone,
When you fleet hence, can be bequeathed to none.
Or, if it could, down from th'enameled sky
All heaven would come to claim this legacy,
And with intestine broils the world destroy,
And quite confound nature's sweet harmony.
Well therefore by the gods decreed it is
We human creatures should enjoy that bliss.
One is no number; maids are nothing then
Without the sweet society of men.
Wilt thou live single still? One shalt thou be,
Though never singling Hymen couple thee.
Wild savages, that drink of running springs,
Think water far excels all earthly things,
But they that daily taste neat wine despise it.
Virginity, albeit some highly prize it,
Compared with marriage, had you tried them both,
Differs as much as wine and water doth.
Base bullion for the stamp's sake we allow;
Even so for men's impression do we you,
By which alone, our reverend fathers say,
Women receive perfection every way.
This idol which you term virginity
Is neither essence subject to the eye
No, nor to any one exterior sense,
Nor hath it any place of residence,
Nor is't of earth or mould celestial,
Or capable of any form at all.
Of that which hath no being do not boast;
Things that are not at all are never lost.
Men foolishly do call it virtuous;
What virtue is it that is born with us?
Much less can honour be ascribed thereto;
Honour is purchased by the deeds we do.
Believe me, Hero, honour is not won
Until some honourable deed be done.
Seek you for chastity, immortal fame,
And know that some have wronged Diana's name?
Whose name is it, if she be false or not
So she be fair, but some vile tongues will blot?
But you are fair, (ay me) so wondrous fair,
So young, so gentle, and so debonair,
As Greece will think if thus you live alone
Some one or other keeps you as his own.
Then, Hero, hate me not nor from me fly
To follow swiftly blasting infamy.
Perhaps thy sacred priesthood makes thee loath.
Tell me, to whom mad'st thou that heedless oath?"

"To Venus," answered she and, as she spake,
Forth from those two tralucent cisterns brake
A stream of liquid pearl, which down her face
Made milk-white paths, whereon the gods might trace
To Jove's high court.
He thus replied: "The rites
In which love's beauteous empress most delights
Are banquets, Doric music, midnight revel,
Plays, masks, and all that stern age counteth evil.
Thee as a holy idiot doth she scorn
For thou in vowing chastity hast sworn
To rob her name and honour, and thereby
Committ'st a sin far worse than perjury,
Even sacrilege against her deity,
Through regular and formal purity.
To expiate which sin, kiss and shake hands.
Such sacrifice as this Venus demands."

Thereat she smiled and did deny him so,
As put thereby, yet might he hope for moe.
Which makes him quickly re-enforce his speech,
And her in humble manner thus beseech.
"Though neither gods nor men may thee deserve,
Yet for her sake, whom you have vowed to serve,
Abandon fruitless cold virginity,
The gentle queen of love's sole enemy.
Then shall you most resemble Venus' nun,
When Venus' sweet rites are performed and done.
Flint-breasted Pallas joys in single life,
But Pallas and your mistress are at strife.
Love, Hero, then, and be not tyrannous,
But heal the heart that thou hast wounded thus,
Nor stain thy youthful years with avarice.
Fair fools delight to be accounted nice.
The richest corn dies, if it be not reaped;
Beauty alone is lost, too warily kept."

These arguments he used, and many more,
Wherewith she yielded, that was won before.
Hero's looks yielded but her words made war.
Women are won when they begin to jar.
Thus, having swallowed Cupid's golden hook,
The more she strived, the deeper was she strook.
Yet, evilly feigning anger, strove she still
And would be thought to grant against her will.
So having paused a while at last she said,
"Who taught thee rhetoric to deceive a maid?
Ay me, such words as these should I abhor
And yet I like them for the orator."

With that Leander stooped to have embraced her
But from his spreading arms away she cast her,
And thus bespake him: "Gentle youth, forbear
To touch the sacred garments which I wear.
Upon a rock and underneath a hill
Far from the town (where all is whist and still,
Save that the sea, playing on yellow sand,
Sends forth a rattling murmur to the land,
Whose sound allures the golden Morpheus
In silence of the night to visit us)
My turret stands and there, God knows, I play.
With Venus' swans and sparrows all the day.
A dwarfish beldam bears me company,
That hops about the chamber where I lie,
And spends the night (that might be better spent)
In vain discourse and apish merriment.
Come thither." As she spake this, her tongue tripped,
For unawares "come thither" from her slipped.
And suddenly her former colour changed,
And here and there her eyes through anger ranged.
And like a planet, moving several ways,
At one self instant she, poor soul, assays,
Loving, not to love at all, and every part
Strove to resist the motions of her heart.
And hands so pure, so innocent, nay, such
As might have made heaven stoop to have a touch,
Did she uphold to Venus, and again
Vowed spotless chastity, but all in vain.
Cupid beats down her prayers with his wings,
Her vows above the empty air he flings,
All deep enraged, his sinewy bow he bent,
And shot a shaft that burning from him went,
Wherewith she strooken, looked so dolefully,
As made love sigh to see his tyranny.
And as she wept her tears to pearl he turned,
And wound them on his arm and for her mourned.
Then towards the palace of the destinies
Laden with languishment and grief he flies,
And to those stern nymphs humbly made request
Both might enjoy each other, and be blest.
But with a ghastly dreadful countenance,
Threatening a thousand deaths at every glance,
They answered Love, nor would vouchsafe so much
As one poor word, their hate to him was such.
Hearken a while and I will tell you why.
Heaven's winged herald, Jove-borne Mercury,
The selfsame day that he asleep had laid
Enchanted Argus, spied a country maid
Whose careless hair instead of pearl t'adorn it
Glistered with dew, as one that seemed to scorn it;
Her breath as fragrant as the morning rose,
Her mind pure, and her tongue untaught to gloze.
Yet proud she was (for lofty pride that dwells
In towered courts is oft in shepherds' cells.)
And too too well the fair vermilion knew,
And silver tincture of her cheeks, that drew
The love of every swain. On her this god
Enamoured was, and with his snaky rod
Did charm her nimble feet, and made her stay,
The while upon a hillock down he lay
And sweetly on his pipe began to play,
And with smooth speech her fancy to assay,
Till in his twining arms he locked her fast
And then he wooed with kisses; and at last,
As shepherds do, her on the ground he laid
And, tumbling in the grass, he often strayed
Beyond the bounds of shame, in being bold
To eye those parts which no eye should behold.
And, like an insolent commanding lover
Boasting his parentage, would needs discover
The way to new Elysium, but she,
Whose only dower was her chastity,
Having striv'n in vain was now about to cry
And crave the help of shepherds that were nigh.
Herewith he stayed his fury, and began
To give her leave to rise. Away she ran;
After went Mercury who used such cunning
As she, to hear his tale, left off her running.
Maids are not won by brutish force and might,
But speeches full of pleasure, and delight.
And, knowing Hermes courted her, was glad
That she such loveliness and beauty had
As could provoke his liking, yet was mute
And neither would deny nor grant his suit.
Still vowed he love. She, wanting no excuse
To feed him with delays, as women use,
Or thirsting after immortality, -
All women are ambitious naturally -
Imposed upon her lover such a task
As he ought not perform nor yet she ask.
A draught of flowing nectar she requested,
Wherewith the king of gods and men is feasted.
He, ready to accomplish what she willed,
Stole some from Hebe (Hebe Jove's cup filled)
And gave it to his simple rustic love.
Which being known (as what is hid from Jove?)
He inly stormed and waxed more furious
Than for the fire filched by Prometheus,
And thrusts him down from heaven. He, wandering here,
In mournful terms, with sad and heavy cheer,
Complained to Cupid. Cupid for his sake,
To be revenged on Jove did undertake.
And those on whom heaven, earth, and hell relies,
I mean the adamantine Destinies,
He wounds with love, and forced them equally
To dote upon deceitful Mercury.
They offered him the deadly fatal knife
That shears the slender threads of human life.
At his fair feathered feet the engines laid
Which th' earth from ugly Chaos' den upweighed.
These he regarded not but did entreat
That Jove, usurper of his father's seat,
Might presently be banished into hell,
And aged Saturn in Olympus dwell.
They granted what he craved, and once again
Saturn and Ops began their golden reign.
Murder, rape, war, lust, and treachery,
Were with Jove closed in Stygian empery.
But long this blessed time continued not.
As soon as he his wished purpose got
He reckless of his promise did despise
The love of th' everlasting Destinies.
They seeing it both love and him abhorred
And Jupiter unto his place restored.
And but that Learning in despite of Fate
Will mount aloft and enter heaven gate
And to the seat of Jove itself advance,
Hermes had slept in hell with Ignorance.
Yet as a punishment they added this,
That he and Poverty should always kiss.
And to this day is every scholar poor;
Gross gold from them runs headlong to the boor.
Likewise the angry Sisters thus deluded,
To venge themselves on Hermes, have concluded
That Midas' brood shall sit in honour's chair,
To which the Muses' sons are only heir;
And fruitful wits, that in aspiring are,
Shall discontent run into regions far;
And few great lords in virtuous deeds shall joy
But be surprised with every garish toy,
And still enrich the lofty servile clown,
Who with encroaching guile keeps learning down.
Then Muse not Cupid's suit no better sped,
Seeing in their loves the Fates were injured.

(The end of the First Sestiad)



SECOND SESTIAD

By this, sad Hero, with love unacquainted,
Viewing Leander's face, fell down and fainted.
He kissed her and breathed life into her lips,
Wherewith as one displeased away she trips.
Yet, as she went, full often looked behind,
And many poor excuses did she find
To linger by the way, and once she stayed,
And would have turned again, but was afraid,
In offering parley, to be counted light.
So on she goes and in her idle flight
Her painted fan of curled plumes let fall,
Thinking to train Leander therewithal.
He, being a novice, knew not what she meant
But stayed, and after her a letter sent,
Which joyful Hero answered in such sort,
As he had hope to scale the beauteous fort
Wherein the liberal Graces locked their wealth,
And therefore to her tower he got by stealth.
Wide open stood the door, he need not climb,
And she herself before the pointed time
Had spread the board, with roses strowed the room,
And oft looked out, and mused he did not come.
At last he came.
O who can tell the greeting
These greedy lovers had at their first meeting.
He asked, she gave, and nothing was denied.
Both to each other quickly were affied.
Look how their hands, so were their hearts united,
And what he did she willingly requited.
(Sweet are the kisses, the embracements sweet,
When like desires and affections meet,
For from the earth to heaven is Cupid raised,
Where fancy is in equal balance peised.)
Yet she this rashness suddenly repented
And turned aside, and to herself lamented
As if her name and honour had been wronged
By being possessed of him for whom she longed.
Ay, and she wished, albeit not from her heart
That he would leave her turret and depart.
The mirthful god of amorous pleasure smiled
To see how he this captive nymph beguiled.
For hitherto he did but fan the fire,
And kept it down that it might mount the higher.
Now waxed she jealous lest his love abated,
Fearing her own thoughts made her to be hated.
Therefore unto him hastily she goes
And, like light Salmacis, her body throws
Upon his bosom where with yielding eyes
She offers up herself a sacrifice
To slake his anger if he were displeased.
O, what god would not therewith be appeased?
Like Aesop's cock this jewel he enjoyed
And as a brother with his sister toyed
Supposing nothing else was to be done,
Now he her favour and good will had won.
But know you not that creatures wanting sense
By nature have a mutual appetence,
And, wanting organs to advance a step,
Moved by love's force unto each other lep?
Much more in subjects having intellect
Some hidden influence breeds like effect.
Albeit Leander rude in love and raw,
Long dallying with Hero, nothing saw
That might delight him more, yet he suspected
Some amorous rites or other were neglected.
Therefore unto his body hers he clung.
She, fearing on the rushes to be flung,
Strived with redoubled strength; the more she strived
The more a gentle pleasing heat revived,
Which taught him all that elder lovers know.
And now the same gan so to scorch and glow
As in plain terms (yet cunningly) he craved it.
Love always makes those eloquent that have it.
She, with a kind of granting, put him by it
And ever, as he thought himself most nigh it,
Like to the tree of Tantalus, she fled
And, seeming lavish, saved her maidenhead.
Ne'er king more sought to keep his diadem,
Than Hero this inestimable gem.
Above our life we love a steadfast friend,
Yet when a token of great worth we send,
We often kiss it, often look thereon,
And stay the messenger that would be gone.
No marvel then, though Hero would not yield
So soon to part from that she dearly held.
Jewels being lost are found again, this never;
'Tis lost but once, and once lost, lost forever.

Now had the morn espied her lover's steeds,
Whereat she starts, puts on her purple weeds,
And red for anger that he stayed so long
All headlong throws herself the clouds among.
And now Leander, fearing to be missed,
Embraced her suddenly, took leave, and kissed.
Long was he taking leave, and loath to go,
And kissed again as lovers use to do.
Sad Hero wrung him by the hand and wept
Saying, "Let your vows and promises be kept."
Then standing at the door she turned about
As loath to see Leander going out.
And now the sun that through th' horizon peeps,
As pitying these lovers, downward creeps,
So that in silence of the cloudy night,
Though it was morning, did he take his flight.
But what the secret trusty night concealed
Leander's amorous habit soon revealed.
With Cupid's myrtle was his bonnet crowned,
About his arms the purple riband wound
Wherewith she wreathed her largely spreading hair.
Nor could the youth abstain, but he must wear
The sacred ring wherewith she was endowed
When first religious chastity she vowed.
Which made his love through Sestos to be known,
And thence unto Abydos sooner blown
Than he could sail; for incorporeal fame
Whose weight consists in nothing but her name,
Is swifter than the wind, whose tardy plumes
Are reeking water and dull earthly fumes.
Home when he came, he seemed not to be there,
But, like exiled air thrust from his sphere,
Set in a foreign place; and straight from thence,
Alcides like, by mighty violence
He would have chased away the swelling main
That him from her unjustly did detain.
Like as the sun in a diameter
Fires and inflames objects removed far,
And heateth kindly, shining laterally,
So beauty sweetly quickens when 'tis nigh,
But being separated and removed,
Burns where it cherished, murders where it loved.
Therefore even as an index to a book,
So to his mind was young Leander's look.
O, none but gods have power their love to hide,
Affection by the countenance is descried.
The light of hidden fire itself discovers,
And love that is concealed betrays poor lovers,
His secret flame apparently was seen.
Leander's father knew where he had been
And for the same mildly rebuked his son,
Thinking to quench the sparkles new begun.
But love resisted once grows passionate,
And nothing more than counsel lovers hate.
For as a hot proud horse highly disdains
To have his head controlled, but breaks the reins,
Spits forth the ringled bit, and with his hooves
Checks the submissive ground; so he that loves,
The more he is restrained, the worse he fares.
What is it now, but mad Leander dares?
"O Hero, Hero!" thus he cried full oft;
And then he got him to a rock aloft,
Where having spied her tower, long stared he on't,
And prayed the narrow toiling Hellespont
To part in twain, that he might come and go;
But still the rising billows answered, "No."
With that he stripped him to the ivory skin
And, crying "Love, I come," leaped lively in.
Whereat the sapphire visaged god grew proud,
And made his capering Triton sound aloud,
Imagining that Ganymede, displeased,
Had left the heavens; therefore on him he seized.
Leander strived; the waves about him wound,
And pulled him to the bottom, where the ground
Was strewed with pearl, and in low coral groves
Sweet singing mermaids sported with their loves
On heaps of heavy gold, and took great pleasure
To spurn in careless sort the shipwrack treasure.
For here the stately azure palace stood
Where kingly Neptune and his train abode.
The lusty god embraced him, called him "Love,"
And swore he never should return to Jove.
But when he knew it was not Ganymede,
For under water he was almost dead,
He heaved him up and, looking on his face,
Beat down the bold waves with his triple mace,
Which mounted up, intending to have kissed him,
And fell in drops like tears because they missed him.
Leander, being up, began to swim
And, looking back, saw Neptune follow him,
Whereat aghast, the poor soul 'gan to cry
"O, let me visit Hero ere I die!"
The god put Helle's bracelet on his arm,
And swore the sea should never do him harm.
He clapped his plump cheeks, with his tresses played
And, smiling wantonly, his love bewrayed.
He watched his arms and, as they opened wide
At every stroke, betwixt them would he slide
And steal a kiss, and then run out and dance,
And, as he turned, cast many a lustful glance,
And threw him gaudy toys to please his eye,
And dive into the water, and there pry
Upon his breast, his thighs, and every limb,
And up again, and close beside him swim,
And talk of love.
Leander made reply,
"You are deceived; I am no woman, I."
Thereat smiled Neptune, and then told a tale,
How that a shepherd, sitting in a vale,
Played with a boy so fair and kind,
As for his love both earth and heaven pined;
That of the cooling river durst not drink,
Lest water nymphs should pull him from the brink.
And when he sported in the fragrant lawns,
Goat footed satyrs and upstaring fauns
Would steal him thence. Ere half this tale was done,
"Ay me," Leander cried, "th' enamoured sun
That now should shine on Thetis' glassy bower,
Descends upon my radiant Hero's tower.
O, that these tardy arms of mine were wings!"
And, as he spake, upon the waves he springs.
Neptune was angry that he gave no ear,
And in his heart revenging malice bare.
He flung at him his mace but, as it went,
He called it in, for love made him repent.
The mace, returning back, his own hand hit
As meaning to be venged for darting it.
When this fresh bleeding wound Leander viewed,
His colour went and came, as if he rued
The grief which Neptune felt. In gentle breasts
Relenting thoughts, remorse, and pity rests.
And who have hard hearts and obdurate minds,
But vicious, harebrained, and illiterate hinds?
The god, seeing him with pity to be moved,
Thereon concluded that he was beloved.
(Love is too full of faith, too credulous,
With folly and false hope deluding us.)
Wherefore, Leander's fancy to surprise,
To the rich Ocean for gifts he flies.
'tis wisdom to give much; a gift prevails
When deep persuading oratory fails.

By this Leander, being near the land,
Cast down his weary feet and felt the sand.
Breathless albeit he were he rested not
Till to the solitary tower he got,
And knocked and called. At which celestial noise
The longing heart of Hero much more joys
Than nymphs and shepherds when the timbrel rings,
Or crooked dolphin when the sailor sings.
She stayed not for her robes but straight arose
And, drunk with gladness, to the door she goes,
Where seeing a naked man, she screeched for fear
(Such sights as this to tender maids are rare)
And ran into the dark herself to hide.
(Rich jewels in the dark are soonest spied).
Unto her was he led, or rather drawn
By those white limbs which sparkled through the lawn.
The nearer that he came, the more she fled,
And, seeking refuge, slipped into her bed.
Whereon Leander sitting thus began,
Through numbing cold, all feeble, faint, and wan.
"If not for love, yet, love, for pity sake,
Me in thy bed and maiden bosom take.
At least vouchsafe these arms some little room,
Who, hoping to embrace thee, cheerly swum.
This head was beat with many a churlish billow,
And therefore let it rest upon thy pillow."
Herewith affrighted, Hero shrunk away,
And in her lukewarm place Leander lay,
Whose lively heat, like fire from heaven fet,
Would animate gross clay and higher set
The drooping thoughts of base declining souls
Than dreary Mars carousing nectar bowls.
His hands he cast upon her like a snare.
She, overcome with shame and sallow fear,
Like chaste Diana when Actaeon spied her,
Being suddenly betrayed, dived down to hide her.
And, as her silver body downward went,
With both her hands she made the bed a tent,
And in her own mind thought herself secure,
O'ercast with dim and darksome coverture.
And now she lets him whisper in her ear,
Flatter, entreat, promise, protest and swear;
Yet ever, as he greedily assayed
To touch those dainties, she the harpy played,
And every limb did, as a soldier stout,
Defend the fort, and keep the foeman out.
For though the rising ivory mount he scaled,
Which is with azure circling lines empaled,
Much like a globe (a globe may I term this,
By which love sails to regions full of bliss)
Yet there with Sisyphus he toiled in vain,
Till gentle parley did the truce obtain.
Wherein Leander on her quivering breast
Breathless spoke something, and sighed out the rest;
Which so prevailed, as he with small ado
Enclosed her in his arms and kissed her too.
And every kiss to her was as a charm,
And to Leander as a fresh alarm,
So that the truce was broke and she, alas,
(Poor silly maiden) at his mercy was.
Love is not full of pity (as men say)
But deaf and cruel where he means to prey.
Even as a bird, which in our hands we wring,
Forth plungeth and oft flutters with her wing,
She trembling strove.

This strife of hers (like that
Which made the world) another world begat
Of unknown joy. Treason was in her thought,
And cunningly to yield herself she sought.
Seeming not won, yet won she was at length.
In such wars women use but half their strength.
Leander now, like Theban Hercules,
Entered the orchard of th' Hesperides;
Whose fruit none rightly can describe but he
That pulls or shakes it from the golden tree.
And now she wished this night were never done,
And sighed to think upon th' approaching sun;
For much it grieved her that the bright daylight
Should know the pleasure of this blessed night,
And them, like Mars and Erycine, display
Both in each other's arms chained as they lay.
Again, she knew not how to frame her look,
Or speak to him, who in a moment took
That which so long so charily she kept,
And fain by stealth away she would have crept,
And to some corner secretly have gone,
Leaving Leander in the bed alone.
But as her naked feet were whipping out,
He on the sudden clinged her so about,
That, mermaid-like, unto the floor she slid.
One half appeared, the other half was hid.
Thus near the bed she blushing stood upright,
And from her countenance behold ye might
A kind of twilight break, which through the hair,
As from an orient cloud, glimpsed here and there,
And round about the chamber this false morn
Brought forth the day before the day was born.
So Hero's ruddy cheek Hero betrayed,
And her all naked to his sight displayed,
Whence his admiring eyes more pleasure took
Than Dis, on heaps of gold fixing his look.
By this, Apollo's golden harp began
To sound forth music to the ocean,
Which watchful Hesperus no sooner heard
But he the bright day-bearing car prepared
And ran before, as harbinger of light,
And with his flaring beams mocked ugly night,
Till she, o'ercome with anguish, shame, and rage,
Danged down to hell her loathsome carriage.

          Enter CHORUS.

     CHORUS. Not marching now in fields of Thrasymene,
     Where Mars did mate1 the Carthaginians;
     Nor sporting in the dalliance of love,
     In courts of kings where state is overturn'd;
     Nor in the pomp of proud audacious deeds,
     Intends our Muse to vaunt2 her3 heavenly verse:
     Only this, gentlemen,—we must perform
     The form of Faustus' fortunes, good or bad:
     To patient judgments we appeal our plaud,
     And speak for Faustus in his infancy.
     Now is he born, his parents base of stock,
     In Germany, within a town call'd Rhodes:
     Of riper years, to Wertenberg he went,
     Whereas4 his kinsmen chiefly brought him up.
     So soon he profits in divinity,
     The fruitful plot of scholarism grac'd,
     That shortly he was grac'd with doctor's name,
     Excelling all whose sweet delight disputes
     In heavenly matters of theology;
     Till swoln with cunning,5 of a self-conceit,
     His waxen wings did mount above his reach,
     And, melting, heavens conspir'd his overthrow;
     For, falling to a devilish exercise,
     And glutted now6 with learning's golden gifts,
     He surfeits upon cursed necromancy;
     Nothing so sweet as magic is to him,
     Which he prefers before his chiefest bliss:
     And this the man that in his study sits.
          [Exit.]

          FAUSTUS discovered in his study.7

     FAUSTUS. Settle thy studies, Faustus, and begin
     To sound the depth of that thou wilt profess:
     Having commenc'd, be a divine in shew,
     Yet level at the end of every art,
     And live and die in Aristotle's works.
     Sweet Analytics, 'tis thou8 hast ravish'd me!
     Bene disserere est finis logices.
     Is, to dispute well, logic's chiefest end?
     Affords this art no greater miracle?
     Then read no more; thou hast attain'd that9 end:
     A greater subject fitteth Faustus' wit:
     Bid Economy10 farewell, and11 Galen come,
     Seeing, Ubi desinit philosophus, ibi incipit medicus:
     Be a physician, Faustus; heap up gold,
     And be eterniz'd for some wondrous cure:
     Summum bonum medicinae sanitas,
     The end of physic is our body's health.
     Why, Faustus, hast thou not attain'd that end?
     Is not thy common talk found aphorisms?
     Are not thy bills hung up as monuments,
     Whereby whole cities have escap'd the plague,
     And thousand desperate maladies been eas'd?
     Yet art thou still but Faustus, and a man.
     Couldst12 thou make men13 to live eternally,
     Or, being dead, raise them to life again,
     Then this profession were to be esteem'd.
     Physic, farewell!  Where is Justinian?

          [Reads.]
     Si una eademque res legatur14 duobus, alter rem,
     alter valorem rei, &c.

     A pretty case of paltry legacies!

          [Reads.]
     Exhoereditare filium non potest pater, nisi, &c.15

     Such is the subject of the institute,
     And universal body of the law:16
     This17 study fits a mercenary drudge,
     Who aims at nothing but external trash;
     Too servile18 and illiberal for me.
     When all is done, divinity is best:
     Jerome's Bible, Faustus; view it well.

          [Reads.]
     Stipendium peccati mors est.
                                   Ha!
                                        Stipendium, &c.

     The reward of sin is death:  that's hard.

          [Reads.]
     Si peccasse negamus, fallimur, et nulla est in nobis veritas;

     If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and
     there's no truth in us.  Why, then, belike we must sin, and so
     consequently die:
     Ay, we must die an everlasting death.
     What doctrine call you this, Che sera, sera,19
     What will be, shall be?  Divinity, adieu!
     These metaphysics of magicians,
     And necromantic books are heavenly;
     Lines, circles, scenes,20 letters, and characters;
     Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires.
     O, what a world of profit and delight,
     Of power, of honour, of omnipotence,
     Is promis'd to the studious artizan!
     All things that move between the quiet poles
     Shall be at my command:  emperors and kings
     Are but obeyed in their several provinces,
     Nor can they raise the wind, or rend the clouds;
     But his dominion that exceeds in this,
     Stretcheth as far as doth the mind of man;
     A sound magician is a mighty god:
     Here, Faustus, tire21 thy brains to gain a deity.

          Enter WAGNER.22

     Wagner, commend me to my dearest friends,
     The German Valdes and Cornelius;
     Request them earnestly to visit me.

     WAGNER. I will, sir.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. Their conference will be a greater help to me
     Than all my labours, plod I ne'er so fast.

          Enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.

     GOOD ANGEL. O, Faustus, lay that damned book aside,
     And gaze not on it, lest it tempt thy soul,
     And heap God's heavy wrath upon thy head!
     Read, read the Scriptures:—that is blasphemy.

     EVIL ANGEL. Go forward, Faustus, in that famous art
     Wherein all Nature's treasure23 is contain'd:
     Be thou on earth as Jove24 is in the sky,
     Lord and commander of these elements.25
          [Exeunt Angels.]

     FAUSTUS. How am I glutted with conceit of this!
     Shall I make spirits fetch me what I please,
     Resolve26 me of all ambiguities,
     Perform what desperate enterprise I will?
     I'll have them fly to India for gold,
     Ransack the ocean for orient pearl,
     And search all corners of the new-found world
     For pleasant fruits and princely delicates;
     I'll have them read me strange philosophy,
     And tell the secrets of all foreign kings;
     I'll have them wall all Germany with brass,
     And make swift Rhine circle fair Wertenberg;
     I'll have them fill the public schools with silk,27
     Wherewith the students shall be bravely clad;
     I'll levy soldiers with the coin they bring,
     And chase the Prince of Parma from our land,
     And reign sole king of all the28 provinces;
     Yea, stranger engines for the brunt of war,
     Than was the fiery keel at Antwerp's bridge,29
     I'll make my servile spirits to invent.

          Enter VALDES and CORNELIUS.

     Come, German Valdes, and Cornelius,
     And make me blest with your sage conference.
     Valdes, sweet Valdes, and Cornelius,
     Know that your words have won me at the last
     To practice magic and concealed arts:
     Yet not your words only,30 but mine own fantasy,
     That will receive no object; for my head
     But ruminates on necromantic skill.
     Philosophy is odious and obscure;
     Both law and physic are for petty wits;
     Divinity is basest of the three,
     Unpleasant, harsh, contemptible, and vile:31
     'Tis magic, magic, that hath ravish'd me.
     Then, gentle friends, aid me in this attempt;
     And I, that have with concise syllogisms32
     Gravell'd the pastors of the German church,
     And made the flowering pride of Wertenberg
     Swarm to my problems, as the infernal spirits
     On sweet Musaeus when he came to hell,
     Will be as cunning33 as Agrippa34 was,
     Whose shadow35 made all Europe honour him.

     VALDES. Faustus, these books, thy wit, and our experience,
     Shall make all nations to canonize us.
     As Indian Moors obey their Spanish lords,
     So shall the spirits36 of every element
     Be always serviceable to us three;
     Like lions shall they guard us when we please;
     Like Almain rutters37 with their horsemen's staves,
     Or Lapland giants, trotting by our sides;
     Sometimes like women, or unwedded maids,
     Shadowing more beauty in their airy brows
     Than have the38 white breasts of the queen of love:
     From39 Venice shall they drag huge argosies,
     And from America the golden fleece
     That yearly stuffs old Philip's treasury;
     If learned Faustus will be resolute.

     FAUSTUS. Valdes, as resolute am I in this
     As thou to live:  therefore object it not.

     CORNELIUS. The miracles that magic will perform
     Will make thee vow to study nothing else.
     He that is grounded in astrology,
     Enrich'd with tongues, well seen in40 minerals,
     Hath all the principles magic doth require:
     Then doubt not, Faustus, but to be renowm'd,41
     And more frequented for this mystery
     Than heretofore the Delphian oracle.
     The spirits tell me they can dry the sea,
     And fetch the treasure of all foreign wrecks,
     Ay, all the wealth that our forefathers hid
     Within the massy entrails of the earth:
     Then tell me, Faustus, what shall we three want?

     FAUSTUS. Nothing, Cornelius.  O, this cheers my soul!
     Come, shew me some demonstrations magical,
     That I may conjure in some lusty grove,
     And have these joys in full possession.

     VALDES. Then haste thee to some solitary grove,
     And bear wise Bacon's and Albertus'42 works,
     The Hebrew Psalter, and New Testament;
     And whatsoever else is requisite
     We will inform thee ere our conference cease.

     CORNELIUS. Valdes, first let him know the words of art;
     And then, all other ceremonies learn'd,
     Faustus may try his cunning43 by himself.

     VALDES. First I'll instruct thee in the rudiments,
     And then wilt thou be perfecter than I.

     FAUSTUS. Then come and dine with me, and, after meat,
     We'll canvass every quiddity thereof;
     For, ere I sleep, I'll try what I can do:
     This night I'll conjure, though I die therefore.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter two SCHOLARS.44

     FIRST SCHOLAR. I wonder what's become of Faustus, that was wont
     to make our schools ring with sic probo.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. That shall we know, for see, here comes his boy.

          Enter WAGNER.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. How now, sirrah! where's thy master?

     WAGNER. God in heaven knows.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Why, dost not thou know?

     WAGNER. Yes, I know; but that follows not.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Go to, sirrah! leave your jesting, and tell us
     where he is.

     WAGNER. That follows not necessary by force of argument, that you,
     being licentiates, should stand upon:45  therefore acknowledge
     your error, and be attentive.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Why, didst thou not say thou knewest?

     WAGNER. Have you any witness on't?

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Yes, sirrah, I heard you.

     WAGNER. Ask my fellow if I be a thief.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Well, you will not tell us?

     WAGNER. Yes, sir, I will tell you:  yet, if you were not dunces,
     you would never ask me such a question; for is not he corpus
     naturale? and is not that mobile? then wherefore should you
     ask me such a question?  But that I am by nature phlegmatic,
     slow to wrath, and prone to lechery (to love, I would say),
     it were not for you to come within forty foot of the place
     of execution, although I do not doubt to see you both hanged
     the next sessions.  Thus having triumphed over you, I will set
     my countenance like a precisian, and begin to speak thus:—
     Truly, my dear brethren, my master is within at dinner,
     with Valdes and Cornelius, as this wine, if it could speak,
     would46 inform your worships:  and so, the Lord bless you,
     preserve you, and keep you, my dear brethren, my dear brethren!47
          [Exit.]

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Nay, then, I fear he is fallen into that damned art
     for which they two are infamous through the world.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Were he a stranger, and not allied to me, yet should
     I grieve for him. But, come, let us go and inform the Rector,
     and see if he by his grave counsel can reclaim him.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. O, but I fear me nothing can reclaim him!

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Yet let us try what we can do.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter FAUSTUS to conjure.48

     FAUSTUS. Now that the gloomy shadow of the earth,
     Longing to view Orion's drizzling look,
     Leaps from th' antartic world unto the sky,
     And dims the welkin with her pitchy breath,
     Faustus, begin thine incantations,
     And try if devils will obey thy hest,
     Seeing thou hast pray'd and sacrific'd to them.
     Within this circle is Jehovah's name,
     Forward and backward anagrammatiz'd,49
     Th' abbreviated50 names of holy saints,
     Figures of every adjunct to the heavens,
     And characters of signs and erring51 stars,
     By which the spirits are enforc'd to rise:
     Then fear not, Faustus, but be resolute,
     And try the uttermost magic can perform.—
     Sint mihi dei Acherontis propitii!  Valeat numen triplex Jehovoe!
     Ignei, aerii, aquatani spiritus, salvete!  Orientis princeps
     Belzebub, inferni ardentis monarcha, et Demogorgon, propitiamus
     vos, ut appareat et surgat Mephistophilis, quod tumeraris:52
     per Jehovam, Gehennam, et consecratam aquam quam nunc spargo,
     signumque crucis quod nunc facio, et per vota nostra, ipse nunc
     surgat nobis dicatus53 Mephistophilis!

          Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     I charge thee to return, and change thy shape;
     Thou art too ugly to attend on me:
     Go, and return an old Franciscan friar;
     That holy shape becomes a devil best.
          [Exit MEPHISTOPHILIS.]

     I see there's virtue in my heavenly words:
     Who would not be proficient in this art?
     How pliant is this Mephistophilis,
     Full of obedience and humility!
     Such is the force of magic and my spells:
     No, Faustus, thou art conjuror laureat,
     That canst command great Mephistophilis:
     Quin regis Mephistophilis fratris imagine.

          Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS like a Franciscan friar.54

     MEPHIST. Now, Faustus, what wouldst thou have me do?

     FAUSTUS. I charge thee wait upon me whilst I live,
     To do whatever Faustus shall command,
     Be it to make the moon drop from her sphere,
     Or the ocean to overwhelm the world.

     MEPHIST. I am a servant to great Lucifer,
     And may not follow thee without his leave:
     No more than he commands must we perform.

     FAUSTUS. Did not he charge thee to appear to me?

     MEPHIST. No, I came hither55 of mine own accord.

     FAUSTUS. Did not my conjuring speeches raise thee? speak.

     MEPHIST. That was the cause, but yet per accidens;56
     For, when we hear one rack the name of God,
     Abjure the Scriptures and his Saviour Christ,
     We fly, in hope to get his glorious soul;
     Nor will we come, unless he use such means
     Whereby he is in danger to be damn'd.
     Therefore the shortest cut for conjuring
     Is stoutly to abjure the Trinity,
     And pray devoutly to the prince of hell.

     FAUSTUS. So Faustus hath
     Already done; and holds this principle,
     There is no chief but only Belzebub;
     To whom Faustus doth dedicate himself.
     This word "damnation" terrifies not him,
     For he confounds hell in Elysium:
     His ghost be with the old philosophers!
     But, leaving these vain trifles of men's souls,
     Tell me what is that Lucifer thy lord?

     MEPHIST. Arch-regent and commander of all spirits.

     FAUSTUS. Was not that Lucifer an angel once?

     MEPHIST. Yes, Faustus, and most dearly lov'd of God.

     FAUSTUS. How comes it, then, that he is prince of devils?

     MEPHIST. O, by aspiring pride and insolence;
     For which God threw him from the face of heaven.

     FAUSTUS. And what are you that live with Lucifer?

     MEPHIST. Unhappy spirits that fell with Lucifer,
     Conspir'd against our God with Lucifer,
     And are for ever damn'd with Lucifer.

     FAUSTUS. Where are you damn'd?

     MEPHIST. In hell.

     FAUSTUS. How comes it, then, that thou art out of hell?

     MEPHIST. Why, this is hell, nor am I out of it:57
     Think'st thou that I, who saw the face of God,
     And tasted the eternal joys of heaven,
     Am not tormented with ten thousand hells,
     In being depriv'd of everlasting bliss?
     O, Faustus, leave these frivolous demands,
     Which strike a terror to my fainting soul!

     FAUSTUS. What, is great Mephistophilis so passionate
     For being deprived of the joys of heaven?
     Learn thou of Faustus manly fortitude,
     And scorn those joys thou never shalt possess.
     Go bear these58 tidings to great Lucifer:
     Seeing Faustus hath incurr'd eternal death
     By desperate thoughts against Jove's59 deity,
     Say, he surrenders up to him his soul,
     So he will spare him four and twenty60 years,
     Letting him live in all voluptuousness;
     Having thee ever to attend on me,
     To give me whatsoever I shall ask,
     To tell me whatsoever I demand,
     To slay mine enemies, and aid my friends,
     And always be obedient to my will.
     Go and return to mighty Lucifer,
     And meet me in my study at midnight,
     And then resolve61 me of thy master's mind.

     MEPHIST. I will, Faustus.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. Had I as many souls as there be stars,
     I'd give them all for Mephistophilis.
     By him I'll be great emperor of the world,
     And make a bridge thorough62 the moving air,
     To pass the ocean with a band of men;
     I'll join the hills that bind the Afric shore,
     And make that country63 continent to Spain,
     And both contributory to my crown:
     The Emperor shall not live but by my leave,
     Nor any potentate of Germany.
     Now that I have obtain'd what I desir'd,64
     I'll live in speculation of this art,
     Till Mephistophilis return again.
          [Exit.]

          Enter WAGNER65 and CLOWN.

     WAGNER. Sirrah boy, come hither.

     CLOWN. How, boy! swowns, boy!  I hope you have seen many boys
     with such pickadevaunts66 as I have:  boy, quotha!

     WAGNER. Tell me, sirrah, hast thou any comings in?

     CLOWN. Ay, and goings out too; you may see else.

     WAGNER. Alas, poor slave! see how poverty jesteth in his nakedness!
     the villain is bare and out of service, and so hungry, that I know
     he would give his soul to the devil for a shoulder of mutton,
     though it were blood-raw.

     CLOWN. How! my soul to the devil for a shoulder of mutton, though
     'twere blood-raw! not so, good friend:  by'r lady,67 I had need
     have it well roasted, and good sauce to it, if I pay so dear.

     WAGNER. Well, wilt thou serve me, and I'll make thee go like
     Qui mihi discipulus?68

     CLOWN. How, in verse?

     WAGNER. No, sirrah; in beaten silk and staves-acre.69

     CLOWN. How, how, knaves-acre! ay, I thought that was all the land
     his father left him.  Do you hear?  I would be sorry to rob you of
     your living.

     WAGNER. Sirrah, I say in staves-acre.

     CLOWN. Oho, oho, staves-acre! why, then, belike, if I were your
     man, I should be full of vermin.70

     WAGNER. So thou shalt, whether thou beest with me or no.  But,
     sirrah, leave your jesting, and bind yourself presently unto me
     for seven years, or I'll turn all the lice about thee into
     familiars,71 and they shall tear thee in pieces.

     CLOWN. Do you hear, sir? you may save that labour; they are too
     familiar with me already:  swowns, they are as bold with my flesh
     as if they had paid for their72 meat and drink.

     WAGNER. Well, do you hear, sirrah? hold, take these guilders.
          [Gives money.]

     CLOWN. Gridirons! what be they?

     WAGNER. Why, French crowns.

     CLOWN. Mass, but for the name of French crowns, a man were as good
     have as many English counters.  And what should I do with these?

     WAGNER. Why, now, sirrah, thou art at an hour's warning, whensoever
     or wheresoever the devil shall fetch thee.

     CLOWN. No, no; here, take your gridirons again.

     WAGNER. Truly, I'll none of them.

     CLOWN. Truly, but you shall.

     WAGNER. Bear witness I gave them him.

     CLOWN. Bear witness I give them you again.

     WAGNER. Well, I will cause two devils presently to fetch thee
     away.—Baliol and Belcher!

     CLOWN. Let your Baliol and your Belcher come here, and I'll
     knock them, they were never so knocked since they were devils:
     say I should kill one of them, what would folks say?  "Do ye see
     yonder tall fellow in the round slop?73 he has killed the devil."
     So I should be called Kill-devil all the parish over.

          Enter two DEVILS; and the CLOWN runs up and down crying.

     WAGNER. Baliol and Belcher,—spirits, away!
          [Exeunt DEVILS.]

     CLOWN. What, are they gone? a vengeance on them! they have vile74
     long nails.  There was a he-devil and a she-devil:  I'll tell you
     how you shall know them; all he-devils has horns, and all
     she-devils has clifts and cloven feet.

     WAGNER. Well, sirrah, follow me.

     CLOWN. But, do you hear? if I should serve you, would you teach
     me to raise up Banios and Belcheos?

     WAGNER. I will teach thee to turn thyself to any thing, to a dog,
     or a cat, or a mouse, or a rat, or any thing.

     CLOWN. How! a Christian fellow to a dog, or a cat, a mouse,
     or a rat! no, no, sir; if you turn me into any thing, let it be
     in the likeness of a little pretty frisking flea, that I may be
     here and there and every where:  O, I'll tickle the pretty wenches'
     plackets!  I'll be amongst them, i'faith.

     WAGNER. Well, sirrah, come.

     CLOWN. But, do you hear, Wagner?

     WAGNER. How!—Baliol and Belcher!

     CLOWN. O Lord!  I pray, sir, let Banio and Belcher go sleep.

     WAGNER. Villain, call me Master Wagner, and let thy left eye be
     diametarily fixed upon my right heel, with quasi vestigiis
     nostris75 insistere.
          [Exit.]

     CLOWN. God forgive me, he speaks Dutch fustian.  Well, I'll follow
     him; I'll serve him, that's flat.
          [Exit.]

          FAUSTUS discovered in his study.

     FAUSTUS. Now, Faustus, must
     Thou needs be damn'd, and canst thou not be sav'd:
     What boots it, then, to think of God or heaven?
     Away with such vain fancies, and despair;
     Despair in God, and trust in Belzebub:
     Now go not backward; no, Faustus, be resolute:
     Why waver'st thou?  O, something soundeth in mine ears,
     "Abjure this magic, turn to God again!"
     Ay, and Faustus will turn to God again.
     To God? he loves thee not;
     The god thou serv'st is thine own appetite,
     Wherein is fix'd the love of Belzebub:
     To him I'll build an altar and a church,
     And offer lukewarm blood of new-born babes.

          Enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.

     GOOD ANGEL. Sweet Faustus, leave that execrable art.

     FAUSTUS. Contrition, prayer, repentance—what of them?

     GOOD ANGEL. O, they are means to bring thee unto heaven!

     EVIL ANGEL. Rather illusions, fruits of lunacy,
     That make men foolish that do trust them most.

     GOOD ANGEL. Sweet Faustus, think of heaven and heavenly things.

     EVIL ANGEL. No, Faustus; think of honour and of76 wealth.
          [Exeunt ANGELS.]

     FAUSTUS. Of wealth!
     Why, the signiory of Embden shall be mine.
     When Mephistophilis shall stand by me,
     What god can hurt thee, Faustus? thou art safe
     Cast no more doubts.—Come, Mephistophilis,
     And bring glad tidings from great Lucifer;—
     Is't not midnight?—come, Mephistophilis,
     Veni, veni, Mephistophile!

          Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     Now tell me77 what says Lucifer, thy lord?

     MEPHIST. That I shall wait on Faustus whilst he lives,78
     So he will buy my service with his soul.

     FAUSTUS. Already Faustus hath hazarded that for thee.

     MEPHIST. But, Faustus, thou must bequeath it solemnly,
     And write a deed of gift with thine own blood;
     For that security craves great Lucifer.
     If thou deny it, I will back to hell.

     FAUSTUS. Stay, Mephistophilis, and tell me, what good will my soul
     do thy lord?

     MEPHIST. Enlarge his kingdom.

     FAUSTUS. Is that the reason why79 he tempts us thus?

     MEPHIST. Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.80

     FAUSTUS. Why,81 have you any pain that torture82 others!

     MEPHIST. As great as have the human souls of men.
     But, tell me, Faustus, shall I have thy soul?
     And I will be thy slave, and wait on thee,
     And give thee more than thou hast wit to ask.

     FAUSTUS. Ay, Mephistophilis, I give it thee.

     MEPHIST. Then, Faustus,83 stab thine arm courageously,
     And bind thy soul, that at some certain day
     Great Lucifer may claim it as his own;
     And then be thou as great as Lucifer.

     FAUSTUS. [Stabbing his arm] Lo, Mephistophilis, for love of thee,
     I cut mine arm, and with my proper blood
     Assure my soul to be great Lucifer's,
     Chief lord and regent of perpetual night!
     View here the blood that trickles from mine arm,
     And let it be propitious for my wish.

     MEPHIST. But, Faustus, thou must
     Write it in manner of a deed of gift.

     FAUSTUS. Ay, so I will [Writes].  But, Mephistophilis,
     My blood congeals, and I can write no more.

     MEPHIST. I'll fetch thee fire to dissolve it straight.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. What might the staying of my blood portend?
     Is it unwilling I should write this bill?84
     Why streams it not, that I may write afresh?
     FAUSTUS GIVES TO THEE HIS SOUL:  ah, there it stay'd!
     Why shouldst thou not? is not thy soul shine own?
     Then write again, FAUSTUS GIVES TO THEE HIS SOUL.

          Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS with a chafer of coals.

     MEPHIST. Here's fire; come, Faustus, set it on.85

     FAUSTUS. So, now the blood begins to clear again;
     Now will I make an end immediately.
          [Writes.]

     MEPHIST. O, what will not I do to obtain his soul?
          [Aside.]

     FAUSTUS. Consummatum est; this bill is ended,
     And Faustus hath bequeath'd his soul to Lucifer.
     But what is this inscription86 on mine arm?
     Homo, fuge:  whither should I fly?
     If unto God, he'll throw me87 down to hell.
     My senses are deceiv'd; here's nothing writ:—
     I see it plain; here in this place is writ,
     Homo, fuge:  yet shall not Faustus fly.

     MEPHIST. I'll fetch him somewhat to delight his mind.
          [Aside, and then exit.]

          Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS with DEVILS, who give crowns
          and rich apparel to FAUSTUS, dance, and then depart.

     FAUSTUS. Speak, Mephistophilis, what means this show?

     MEPHIST. Nothing, Faustus, but to delight thy mind withal,
     And to shew thee what magic can perform.

     FAUSTUS. But may I raise up spirits when I please?

     MEPHIST. Ay, Faustus, and do greater things than these.

     FAUSTUS. Then there's enough for a thousand souls.
     Here, Mephistophilis, receive this scroll,
     A deed of gift of body and of soul:
     But yet conditionally that thou perform
     All articles prescrib'd between us both.

     MEPHIST. Faustus, I swear by hell and Lucifer
     To effect all promises between us made!

     FAUSTUS. Then hear me read them.  [Reads] ON THESE CONDITIONS
     FOLLOWING.  FIRST, THAT FAUSTUS MAY BE A SPIRIT IN FORM AND
     SUBSTANCE.  SECONDLY, THAT MEPHISTOPHILIS SHALL BE HIS SERVANT,
     AND AT HIS COMMAND.  THIRDLY, THAT MEPHISTOPHILIS SHALL DO FOR HIM,
     AND BRING HIM WHATSOEVER HE DESIRES.88  FOURTHLY, THAT HE SHALL
     BE IN HIS CHAMBER OR HOUSE INVISIBLE.  LASTLY, THAT HE SHALL APPEAR
     TO THE SAID JOHN FAUSTUS, AT ALL TIMES, IN WHAT FORM OR SHAPE
     SOEVER HE PLEASE.  I, JOHN FAUSTUS, OF WERTENBERG, DOCTOR, BY
     THESE PRESENTS, DO GIVE BOTH BODY AND SOUL TO LUCIFER PRINCE OF
     THE EAST, AND HIS MINISTER MEPHISTOPHILIS; AND FURTHERMORE GRANT
     UNTO THEM, THAT,89 TWENTY-FOUR YEARS BEING EXPIRED, THE ARTICLES
     ABOVE-WRITTEN INVIOLATE, FULL POWER TO FETCH OR CARRY THE SAID
     JOHN FAUSTUS, BODY AND SOUL, FLESH, BLOOD, OR GOODS, INTO THEIR
     HABITATION WHERESOEVER.  BY ME, JOHN FAUSTUS.

     MEPHIST. Speak, Faustus, do you deliver this as your deed?

     FAUSTUS. Ay, take it, and the devil give thee good on't!

     MEPHIST. Now, Faustus, ask what thou wilt.

     FAUSTUS. First will I question with thee about hell.
     Tell me, where is the place that men call hell?

     MEPHIST. Under the heavens.

     FAUSTUS. Ay, but whereabout?

     MEPHIST. Within the bowels of these90 elements,
     Where we are tortur'd and remain for ever:
     Hell hath no limits, nor is circumscrib'd
     In one self place; for where we are is hell,
     And where hell is, there91 must we ever be:
     And, to conclude, when all the world dissolves,
     And every creature shall be purified,
     All places shall be hell that are92 not heaven.

     FAUSTUS. Come, I think hell's a fable.

     MEPHIST. Ay, think so still, till experience change thy mind.

     FAUSTUS. Why, think'st thou, then, that Faustus shall be damn'd?

     MEPHIST. Ay, of necessity, for here's the scroll
     Wherein thou hast given thy soul to Lucifer.

     FAUSTUS. Ay, and body too:  but what of that?
     Think'st thou that Faustus is so fond93 to imagine
     That, after this life, there is any pain?
     Tush, these are trifles and mere old wives' tales.

     MEPHIST. But, Faustus, I am an instance to prove the contrary,
     For I am damn'd, and am now in hell.

     FAUSTUS. How! now in hell!
     Nay, an this be hell, I'll willingly be damn'd here:
     What! walking, disputing, &c.94
     But, leaving off this, let me have a wife,95
     The fairest maid in Germany;
     For I am wanton and lascivious,
     And cannot live without a wife.

     MEPHIST. How! a wife!
     I prithee, Faustus, talk not of a wife.

     FAUSTUS. Nay, sweet Mephistophilis, fetch me one, for I will have
     one.

     MEPHIST. Well, thou wilt have one?  Sit there till I come:  I'll
     fetch thee a wife in the devil's name.
          [Exit.]

          Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS with a DEVIL drest like a WOMAN,
          with fire-works.

     MEPHIST. Tell me,96 Faustus, how dost thou like thy wife?

     FAUSTUS. A plague on her for a hot whore!

     MEPHIST. Tut, Faustus,
     Marriage is but a ceremonial toy;
     If thou lovest me, think no97 more of it.
     I'll cull thee out the fairest courtezans,
     And bring them every morning to thy bed:
     She whom thine eye shall like, thy heart shall have,
     Be she as chaste as was Penelope,
     As wise as Saba,98 or as beautiful
     As was bright Lucifer before his fall.
     Hold, take this book, peruse it thoroughly:
          [Gives book.]

     The iterating99 of these lines brings gold;
     The framing of this circle on the ground
     Brings whirlwinds, tempests, thunder, and lightning;
     Pronounce this thrice devoutly to thyself,
     And men in armour shall appear to thee,
     Ready to execute what thou desir'st.

     FAUSTUS. Thanks, Mephistophilis:  yet fain would I have a book
     wherein I might behold all spells and incantations, that I
     might raise up spirits when I please.

     MEPHIST. Here they are in this book.
          [Turns to them.]

     FAUSTUS. Now would I have a book where I might see all characters
     and planets of the heavens, that I might know their motions and
     dispositions.

     MEPHIST. Here they are too.
          [Turns to them.]

     FAUSTUS. Nay, let me have one book more,—and then I have done,—
     wherein I might see all plants, herbs, and trees, that grow upon
     the earth.

     MEPHIST. Here they be.

     FAUSTUS. O, thou art deceived.

     MEPHIST. Tut, I warrant thee.
          [Turns to them.]

     FAUSTUS. When I behold the heavens, then I repent,
     And curse thee, wicked Mephistophilis,
     Because thou hast depriv'd me of those joys.

     MEPHIST. Why, Faustus,
     Thinkest thou heaven is such a glorious thing?
     I tell thee, 'tis not half so fair as thou,
     Or any man that breathes on earth.

     FAUSTUS. How prov'st thou that?

     MEPHIST. 'Twas made for man, therefore is man more excellent.

     FAUSTUS. If it were made for man, 'twas made for me:
     I will renounce this magic and repent.

          Enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.

     GOOD ANGEL. Faustus, repent; yet God will pity thee.

     EVIL ANGEL. Thou art a spirit; God cannot pity thee.

     FAUSTUS. Who buzzeth in mine ears I am a spirit?
     Be I a devil, yet God may pity me;
     Ay, God will pity me, if I repent.

     EVIL ANGEL. Ay, but Faustus never shall repent.
          [Exeunt ANGELS.]

     FAUSTUS. My heart's so harden'd, I cannot repent:
     Scarce can I name salvation, faith, or heaven,
     But fearful echoes thunder in mine ears,
     "Faustus, thou art damn'd!" then swords, and knives,
     Poison, guns, halters, and envenom'd steel
     Are laid before me to despatch myself;
     And long ere this I should have slain myself,
     Had not sweet pleasure conquer'd deep despair.
     Have not I made blind Homer sing to me
     Of Alexander's love and Oenon's death?
     And hath not he, that built the walls of Thebes
     With ravishing sound of his melodious harp,
     Made music with my Mephistophilis?
     Why should I die, then, or basely despair?
     I am resolv'd; Faustus shall ne'er repent.—
     Come, Mephistophilis, let us dispute again,
     And argue of divine astrology.100
     Tell me, are there many heavens above the moon
     Are all celestial bodies but one globe,
     As is the substance of this centric earth?

     MEPHIST. As are the elements, such are the spheres,
     Mutually folded in each other's orb,
     And, Faustus,
     All jointly move upon one axletree,
     Whose terminine is term'd the world's wide pole;
     Nor are the names of Saturn, Mars, or Jupiter
     Feign'd, but are erring101 stars.

     FAUSTUS. But, tell me, have they all one motion, both situ et
     tempore?

     MEPHIST. All jointly move from east to west in twenty-four hours
     upon the poles of the world; but differ in their motion upon
     the poles of the zodiac.

     FAUSTUS. Tush,
     These slender trifles Wagner can decide:
     Hath Mephistophilis no greater skill?
     Who knows not the double motion of the planets?
     The first is finish'd in a natural day;
     The second thus; as Saturn in thirty years; Jupiter in twelve;
     Mars in four; the Sun, Venus, and Mercury in a year; the Moon in
     twenty-eight days.  Tush, these are freshmen's102 suppositions.
     But, tell me, hath every sphere a dominion or intelligentia?

     MEPHIST. Ay.

     FAUSTUS. How many heavens or spheres are there?

     MEPHIST. Nine; the seven planets, the firmament, and the empyreal
     heaven.

     FAUSTUS. Well, resolve103 me in this question; why have we not
     conjunctions, oppositions, aspects, eclipses, all at one time,
     but in some years we have more, in some less?

     MEPHIST. Per inoequalem motum respectu totius.

     FAUSTUS. Well, I am answered.  Tell me who made the world?

     MEPHIST. I will not.

     FAUSTUS. Sweet Mephistophilis, tell me.

     MEPHIST. Move me not, for I will not tell thee.

     FAUSTUS. Villain, have I not bound thee to tell me any thing?

     MEPHIST. Ay, that is not against our kingdom; but this is.  Think
     thou on hell, Faustus, for thou art damned.

     FAUSTUS. Think, Faustus, upon God that made the world.

     MEPHIST. Remember this.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. Ay, go, accursed spirit, to ugly hell!
     'Tis thou hast damn'd distressed Faustus' soul.
     Is't not too late?

          Re-enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.

     EVIL ANGEL. Too late.

     GOOD ANGEL. Never too late, if Faustus can repent.

     EVIL ANGEL. If thou repent, devils shall tear thee in pieces.

     GOOD ANGEL. Repent, and they shall never raze thy skin.
          [Exeunt ANGELS.]

     FAUSTUS. Ah, Christ, my Saviour,
     Seek to save104 distressed Faustus' soul!

          Enter LUCIFER, BELZEBUB, and MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     LUCIFER. Christ cannot save thy soul, for he is just:
     There's none but I have interest in the same.

     FAUSTUS. O, who art thou that look'st so terrible?

     LUCIFER. I am Lucifer,
     And this is my companion-prince in hell.

     FAUSTUS. O, Faustus, they are come to fetch away thy soul!

     LUCIFER. We come to tell thee thou dost injure us;
     Thou talk'st of Christ, contrary to thy promise:
     Thou shouldst not think of God:  think of the devil,
     And of his dam too.

     FAUSTUS. Nor will I henceforth:  pardon me in this,
     And Faustus vows never to look to heaven,
     Never to name God, or to pray to him,
     To burn his Scriptures, slay his ministers,
     And make my spirits pull his churches down.

     LUCIFER. Do so, and we will highly gratify thee.  Faustus, we are
     come from hell to shew thee some pastime:  sit down, and thou
     shalt see all the Seven Deadly Sins appear in their proper shapes.

     FAUSTUS. That sight will be as pleasing unto me,
     As Paradise was to Adam, the first day
     Of his creation.

     LUCIFER. Talk not of Paradise nor creation; but mark this show:
     talk of the devil, and nothing else.—Come away!

          Enter the SEVEN DEADLY SINS.105

     Now, Faustus, examine them of their several names and dispositions.

     FAUSTUS. What art thou, the first?

     PRIDE. I am Pride.  I disdain to have any parents.  I am like to
     Ovid's flea; I can creep into every corner of a wench; sometimes,
     like a perriwig, I sit upon her brow; or, like a fan of feathers,
     I kiss her lips; indeed, I do—what do I not?  But, fie, what a
     scent is here!  I'll not speak another word, except the ground
     were perfumed, and covered with cloth of arras.

     FAUSTUS. What art thou, the second?

     COVETOUSNESS. I am Covetousness, begotten of an old churl, in an
     old leathern bag:  and, might I have my wish, I would desire that
     this house and all the people in it were turned to gold, that I
     might lock you up in my good chest:  O, my sweet gold!

     FAUSTUS. What art thou, the third?

     WRATH. I am Wrath.  I had neither father nor mother:  I leapt out
     of a lion's mouth when I was scarce half-an-hour old; and ever
     since I have run up and down the world with this case106
     of rapiers, wounding myself when I had nobody to fight withal.
     I was born in hell; and look to it, for some of you shall be
     my father.

     FAUSTUS. What art thou, the fourth?

     ENVY. I am Envy, begotten of a chimney-sweeper and an oyster-wife.
     I cannot read, and therefore wish all books were burnt.  I am lean
     with seeing others eat.  O, that there would come a famine through
     all the world, that all might die, and I live alone! then thou
     shouldst see how fat I would be.  But must thou sit, and I stand?
     come down, with a vengeance!

     FAUSTUS. Away, envious rascal!—What art thou, the fifth?

     GLUTTONY. Who I, sir?  I am Gluttony.  My parents are all dead,
     and the devil a penny they have left me, but a bare pension, and
     that is thirty meals a-day and ten bevers,107—a small trifle
     to suffice nature.  O, I come of a royal parentage! my grandfather
     was a Gammon of Bacon, my grandmother a Hogshead of Claret-wine;
     my godfathers were these, Peter Pickle-herring and Martin
     Martlemas-beef; O, but my godmother, she was a jolly gentlewoman,
     and well-beloved in every good town and city; her name was Mistress
     Margery March-beer.  Now, Faustus, thou hast heard all my progeny;
     wilt thou bid me to supper?

     FAUSTUS. No, I'll see thee hanged:  thou wilt eat up all my victuals.

     GLUTTONY. Then the devil choke thee!

     FAUSTUS. Choke thyself, glutton!—What art thou, the sixth?

     SLOTH. I am Sloth.  I was begotten on a sunny bank, where I have
     lain ever since; and you have done me great injury to bring me
     from thence:  let me be carried thither again by Gluttony and
     Lechery.  I'll not speak another word for a king's ransom.

     FAUSTUS. What are you, Mistress Minx, the seventh and last?

     LECHERY. Who I, sir?  I am one that loves an inch of raw mutton
     better than an ell of fried stock-fish; and the first letter
     of my name begins with L.108

     FAUSTUS. Away, to hell, to hell!109
          [Exeunt the SINS.]

     LUCIFER. Now, Faustus, how dost thou like this?

     FAUSTUS. O, this feeds my soul!

     LUCIFER. Tut, Faustus, in hell is all manner of delight.

     FAUSTUS. O, might I see hell, and return again,
     How happy were I then!

     LUCIFER. Thou shalt; I will send for thee at midnight.110
     In meantime take this book; peruse it throughly,
     And thou shalt turn thyself into what shape thou wilt.

     FAUSTUS. Great thanks, mighty Lucifer!
     This will I keep as chary as my life.

     LUCIFER. Farewell, Faustus, and think on the devil.

     FAUSTUS. Farewell, great Lucifer.
          [Exeunt LUCIFER and BELZEBUB.]

     Come, Mephistophilis.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter CHORUS.111

     CHORUS. Learned Faustus,
     To know the secrets of astronomy112
     Graven in the book of Jove's high firmament,
     Did mount himself to scale Olympus' top,
     Being seated in a chariot burning bright,
     Drawn by the strength of yoky dragons' necks.
     He now is gone to prove cosmography,
     And, as I guess, will first arrive at Rome,
     To see the Pope and manner of his court,
     And take some part of holy Peter's feast,
     That to this day is highly solemniz'd.
          [Exit.]

          Enter FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS.113

     FAUSTUS. Having now, my good Mephistophilis,
     Pass'd with delight the stately town of Trier,114
     Environ'd round with airy mountain-tops,
     With walls of flint, and deep-entrenched lakes,
     Not to be won by any conquering prince;
     From Paris next,115 coasting the realm of France,
     We saw the river Maine fall into Rhine,
     Whose banks are set with groves of fruitful vines;
     Then up to Naples, rich Campania,
     Whose buildings fair and gorgeous to the eye,
     The streets straight forth, and pav'd with finest brick,
     Quarter the town in four equivalents:
     There saw we learned Maro's golden tomb,
     The way he cut,116 an English mile in length,
     Thorough a rock of stone, in one night's space;
     From thence to Venice, Padua, and the rest,
     In one of which a sumptuous temple stands,117
     That threats the stars with her aspiring top.
     Thus hitherto hath Faustus spent his time:
     But tell me now what resting-place is this?
     Hast thou, as erst I did command,
     Conducted me within the walls of Rome?

     MEPHIST. Faustus, I have; and, because we will not be unprovided,
     I have taken up his Holiness' privy-chamber for our use.

     FAUSTUS. I hope his Holiness will bid us welcome.

     MEPHIST.
     Tut, 'tis no matter; man; we'll be bold with his good cheer.
     And now, my Faustus, that thou mayst perceive
     What Rome containeth to delight thee with,
     Know that this city stands upon seven hills
     That underprop the groundwork of the same:
     Just through the midst118 runs flowing Tiber's stream
     With winding banks that cut it in two parts;
     Over the which four stately bridges lean,
     That make safe passage to each part of Rome:
     Upon the bridge call'd Ponte119 Angelo
     Erected is a castle passing strong,
     Within whose walls such store of ordnance are,
     And double cannons fram'd of carved brass,
     As match the days within one complete year;
     Besides the gates, and high pyramides,
     Which Julius Caesar brought from Africa.

     FAUSTUS. Now, by the kingdoms of infernal rule,
     Of Styx, of120 Acheron, and the fiery lake
     Of ever-burning Phlegethon, I swear
     That I do long to see the monuments
     And situation of bright-splendent Rome:
     Come, therefore, let's away.

     MEPHIST. Nay, Faustus, stay:  I know you'd fain see the Pope,
     And take some part of holy Peter's feast,
     Where thou shalt see a troop of bald-pate friars,
     Whose summum bonum is in belly-cheer.

     FAUSTUS. Well, I'm content to compass then some sport,
     And by their folly make us merriment.
     Then charm me, that I121
     May be invisible, to do what I please,
     Unseen of any whilst I stay in Rome.
          [Mephistophilis charms him.]

     MEPHIST. So, Faustus; now
     Do what thou wilt, thou shalt not be discern'd.

          Sound a Sonnet.122 Enter the POPE and the CARDINAL OF
          LORRAIN to the banquet, with FRIARS attending.

     POPE. My Lord of Lorrain, will't please you draw near?

     FAUSTUS. Fall to, and the devil choke you, an you spare!

     POPE. How now! who's that which spake?—Friars, look about.

     FIRST FRIAR. Here's nobody, if it like your Holiness.

     POPE. My lord, here is a dainty dish was sent me from the Bishop
     of Milan.

     FAUSTUS. I thank you, sir.
          [Snatches the dish.]

     POPE. How now! who's that which snatched the meat from me? will
     no man look?—My lord, this dish was sent me from the Cardinal
     of Florence.

     FAUSTUS. You say true; I'll ha't.
          [Snatches the dish.]

     POPE. What, again!—My lord, I'll drink to your grace.

     FAUSTUS. I'll pledge your grace.
          [Snatches the cup.]

     C. OF LOR. My lord, it may be some ghost, newly crept out of
     Purgatory, come to beg a pardon of your Holiness.

     POPE. It may be so.—Friars, prepare a dirge to lay the fury
     of this ghost.—Once again, my lord, fall to.
          [The POPE crosses himself.]

     FAUSTUS. What, are you crossing of yourself?
     Well, use that trick no more, I would advise you.
          [The POPE crosses himself again.]

     Well, there's the second time.  Aware the third;
     I give you fair warning.
          [The POPE crosses himself again, and FAUSTUS hits him a box
           of the ear; and they all run away.]

     Come on, Mephistophilis; what shall we do?

     MEPHIST. Nay, I know not:  we shall be cursed with bell, book,
     and candle.

     FAUSTUS. How! bell, book, and candle,—candle, book, and bell,—
     Forward and backward, to curse Faustus to hell!
     Anon you shall hear a hog grunt, a calf bleat, and an ass bray,
     Because it is Saint Peter's holiday.

          Re-enter all the FRIARS to sing the Dirge.

     FIRST FRIAR.
     Come, brethren, let's about our business with good devotion.

          They sing.

     CURSED BE HE THAT STOLE AWAY HIS HOLINESS' MEAT FROM THE
     TABLE!  maledicat Dominus!
     CURSED BE HE THAT STRUCK HIS HOLINESS A BLOW ON THE FACE!
     maledicat Dominus!
     CURSED BE HE THAT TOOK FRIAR SANDELO A BLOW ON THE PATE!
     maledicat Dominus!
     CURSED BE HE THAT DISTURBETH OUR HOLY DIRGE!  maledicat
     Dominus!
     CURSED BE HE THAT TOOK AWAY HIS HOLINESS' WINE!  maledicat
     Dominus?  ['?' sic]
          Et omnes Sancti!  Amen!

          [MEPHISTOPHILIS and FAUSTUS beat the FRIARS, and fling
           fire-works among them; and so exeunt.]

          Enter CHORUS.

     CHORUS. When Faustus had with pleasure ta'en the view
     Of rarest things, and royal courts of kings,
     He stay'd his course, and so returned home;
     Where such as bear his absence but with grief,
     I mean his friends and near'st companions,
     Did gratulate his safety with kind words,
     And in their conference of what befell,
     Touching his journey through the world and air,
     They put forth questions of astrology,
     Which Faustus answer'd with such learned skill
     As they admir'd and wonder'd at his wit.
     Now is his fame spread forth in every land:
     Amongst the rest the Emperor is one,
     Carolus the Fifth, at whose palace now
     Faustus is feasted 'mongst his noblemen.
     What there he did, in trial of his art,
     I leave untold; your eyes shall see['t] perform'd.
          [Exit.]

          Enter ROBIN123 the Ostler, with a book in his hand.

     ROBIN. O, this is admirable! here I ha' stolen one of Doctor
     Faustus' conjuring-books, and, i'faith, I mean to search some
     circles for my own use.  Now will I make all the maidens in our
     parish dance at my pleasure, stark naked, before me; and so
     by that means I shall see more than e'er I felt or saw yet.

          Enter RALPH, calling ROBIN.

     RALPH. Robin, prithee, come away; there's a gentleman tarries
     to have his horse, and he would have his things rubbed and made
     clean:  he keeps such a chafing with my mistress about it; and
     she has sent me to look thee out; prithee, come away.

     ROBIN. Keep out, keep out, or else you are blown up, you are
     dismembered, Ralph:  keep out, for I am about a roaring piece
     of work.

     RALPH. Come, what doest thou with that same book? thou canst
     not read?

     ROBIN. Yes, my master and mistress shall find that I can read,
     he for his forehead, she for her private study; she's born to
     bear with me, or else my art fails.

     RALPH. Why, Robin, what book is that?

     ROBIN. What book! why, the most intolerable book for conjuring
     that e'er was invented by any brimstone devil.

     RALPH. Canst thou conjure with it?

     ROBIN. I can do all these things easily with it; first, I can
     make thee drunk with ippocras124 at any tabern125 in Europe
     for nothing; that's one of my conjuring works.

     RALPH. Our Master Parson says that's nothing.

     ROBIN. True, Ralph:  and more, Ralph, if thou hast any mind to
     Nan Spit, our kitchen-maid, then turn her and wind her to thy own
     use, as often as thou wilt, and at midnight.

     RALPH. O, brave, Robin! shall I have Nan Spit, and to mine own
     use?  On that condition I'll feed thy devil with horse-bread as
     long as he lives, of free cost.

     ROBIN. No more, sweet Ralph:  let's go and make clean our boots,
     which lie foul upon our hands, and then to our conjuring in the
     devil's name.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter ROBIN and RALPH126 with a silver goblet.

     ROBIN. Come, Ralph:  did not I tell thee, we were for ever made
     by this Doctor Faustus' book? ecce, signum! here's a simple
     purchase127 for horse-keepers:  our horses shall eat no hay as
     long as this lasts.

     RALPH. But, Robin, here comes the Vintner.

     ROBIN. Hush!  I'll gull him supernaturally.

          Enter VINTNER.

     Drawer,128 I hope all is paid; God be with you!—Come, Ralph.

     VINTNER. Soft, sir; a word with you.  I must yet have a goblet paid
     from you, ere you go.

     ROBIN. I a goblet, Ralph, I a goblet!—I scorn you; and you are
     but a, &c.  I a goblet! search me.

     VINTNER. I mean so, sir, with your favour.
          [Searches ROBIN.]

     ROBIN. How say you now?

     VINTNER. I must say somewhat to your fellow.—You, sir!

     RALPH. Me, sir! me, sir! search your fill.  [VINTNER searches him.]
     Now, sir, you may be ashamed to burden honest men with a matter
     of truth.

     VINTNER. Well, tone129 of you hath this goblet about you.

     ROBIN. You lie, drawer, 'tis afore me [Aside].—Sirrah you, I'll
     teach you to impeach honest men;—stand by;—I'll scour you for
     a goblet;—stand aside you had best, I charge you in the name of
     Belzebub.—Look to the goblet, Ralph [Aside to RALPH].

     VINTNER. What mean you, sirrah?

     ROBIN. I'll tell you what I mean.  [Reads from a book] Sanctobulorum
     Periphrasticon—nay, I'll tickle you, Vintner.—Look to the goblet,
     Ralph [Aside to RALPH].—[Reads] Polypragmos Belseborams framanto
     pacostiphos tostu, Mephistophilis, &c.

          Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS, sets squibs at their backs, and then
          exit.  They run about.

     VINTNER. O, nomine Domini! what meanest thou, Robin? thou hast no
     goblet.

     RALPH. Peccatum peccatorum!—Here's thy goblet, good Vintner.
          [Gives the goblet to VINTNER, who exit.]

     ROBIN. Misericordia pro nobis! what shall I do?  Good devil, forgive
     me now, and I'll never rob thy library more.

          Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     MEPHIST. Monarch of Hell,130 under whose black survey
     Great potentates do kneel with awful fear,
     Upon whose altars thousand souls do lie,
     How am I vexed with these villains' charms?
     From Constantinople am I hither come,
     Only for pleasure of these damned slaves.

     ROBIN. How, from Constantinople! you have had a great journey:
     will you take sixpence in your purse to pay for your supper, and
     be gone?

     MEPHIST. Well, villains, for your presumption, I transform thee
     into an ape, and thee into a dog; and so be gone!
          [Exit.]

     ROBIN. How, into an ape! that's brave:  I'll have fine sport with
     the boys; I'll get nuts and apples enow.

     RALPH. And I must be a dog.

     ROBIN. I'faith, thy head will never be out of the pottage-pot.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter EMPEROR,131 FAUSTUS, and a KNIGHT, with ATTENDANTS.

     EMPEROR. Master Doctor Faustus,132 I have heard strange report
     of thy knowledge in the black art, how that none in my empire
     nor in the whole world can compare with thee for the rare effects
     of magic:  they say thou hast a familiar spirit, by whom thou canst
     accomplish what thou list.  This, therefore, is my request, that
     thou let me see some proof of thy skill, that mine eyes may be
     witnesses to confirm what mine ears have heard reported:  and here
     I swear to thee, by the honour of mine imperial crown, that,
     whatever thou doest, thou shalt be no ways prejudiced or endamaged.

     KNIGHT. I'faith, he looks much like a conjurer.
          [Aside.]

     FAUSTUS. My gracious sovereign, though I must confess myself far
     inferior to the report men have published, and nothing answerable
     to the honour of your imperial majesty, yet, for that love and duty
     binds me thereunto, I am content to do whatsoever your majesty
     shall command me.

     EMPEROR. Then, Doctor Faustus, mark what I shall say.
     As I was sometime solitary set
     Within my closet, sundry thoughts arose
     About the honour of mine ancestors,
     How they had won133 by prowess such exploits,
     Got such riches, subdu'd so many kingdoms,
     As we that do succeed,134 or they that shall
     Hereafter possess our throne, shall
     (I fear me) ne'er attain to that degree
     Of high renown and great authority:
     Amongst which kings is Alexander the Great,
     Chief spectacle of the world's pre-eminence,
     The bright135 shining of whose glorious acts
     Lightens the world with his reflecting beams,
     As when I hear but motion made of him,
     It grieves my soul I never saw the man:
     If, therefore, thou, by cunning of thine art,
     Canst raise this man from hollow vaults below,
     Where lies entomb'd this famous conqueror,
     And bring with him his beauteous paramour,
     Both in their right shapes, gesture, and attire
     They us'd to wear during their time of life,
     Thou shalt both satisfy my just desire,
     And give me cause to praise thee whilst I live.

     FAUSTUS. My gracious lord, I am ready to accomplish your request,
     so far forth as by art and power of my spirit I am able to perform.

     KNIGHT. I'faith, that's just nothing at all.
          [Aside.]

     FAUSTUS. But, if it like your grace, it is not in my ability136
     to present before your eyes the true substantial bodies of those
     two deceased princes, which long since are consumed to dust.

     KNIGHT. Ay, marry, Master Doctor, now there's a sign of grace in
     you, when you will confess the truth.
          [Aside.]

     FAUSTUS. But such spirits as can lively resemble Alexander and
     his paramour shall appear before your grace, in that manner that
     they both137 lived in, in their most flourishing estate; which
     I doubt not shall sufficiently content your imperial majesty.

     EMPEROR. Go to, Master Doctor; let me see them presently.

     KNIGHT. Do you hear, Master Doctor? you bring Alexander and his
     paramour before the Emperor!

     FAUSTUS. How then, sir?

     KNIGHT. I'faith, that's as true as Diana turned me to a stag.

     FAUSTUS. No, sir; but, when Actaeon died, he left the horns for
     you.—Mephistophilis, be gone.
          [Exit MEPHISTOPHILIS.]

     KNIGHT. Nay, an you go to conjuring, I'll be gone.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. I'll meet with you anon for interrupting me so.
     —Here they are, my gracious lord.

          Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS with SPIRITS in the shapes of ALEXANDER
          and his PARAMOUR.

     EMPEROR. Master Doctor, I heard this lady, while she lived, had a
     wart or mole in her neck:  how shall I know whether it be so or no?

     FAUSTUS. Your highness may boldly go and see.

     EMPEROR. Sure, these are no spirits, but the true substantial
     bodies of those two deceased princes.
          [Exeunt Spirits.]

     FAUSTUS. Wilt please your highness now to send for the knight
     that was so pleasant with me here of late?

     EMPEROR. One of you call him forth.
          [Exit ATTENDANT.]

          Re-enter the KNIGHT with a pair of horns on his head.

     How now, sir knight! why, I had thought thou hadst been a bachelor,
     but now I see thou hast a wife, that not only gives thee horns,
     but makes thee wear them.  Feel on thy head.

     KNIGHT. Thou damned wretch and execrable dog,
     Bred in the concave of some monstrous rock,
     How dar'st thou thus abuse a gentleman?
     Villain, I say, undo what thou hast done!

     FAUSTUS. O, not so fast, sir! there's no haste:  but, good, are
     you remembered how you crossed me in my conference with the
     Emperor?  I think I have met with you for it.

     EMPEROR. Good Master Doctor, at my entreaty release him:  he hath
     done penance sufficient.

     FAUSTUS. My gracious lord, not so much for the injury he offered
     me here in your presence, as to delight you with some mirth, hath
     Faustus worthily requited this injurious knight; which being all
     I desire, I am content to release him of his horns:—and,
     sir knight, hereafter speak well of scholars.—Mephistophilis,
     transform him straight.138  [MEPHISTOPHILIS removes the horns.]
     —Now, my good lord, having done my duty, I humbly take my leave.

     EMPEROR. Farewell, Master Doctor:  yet, ere you go,
     Expect from me a bounteous reward.
          [Exeunt EMPEROR, KNIGHT, and ATTENDANTS.]

     FAUSTUS. Now, Mephistophilis,139 the restless course
     That time doth run with calm and silent foot,
     Shortening my days and thread of vital life,
     Calls for the payment of my latest years:
     Therefore, sweet Mephistophilis, let us
     Make haste to Wertenberg.

     MEPHIST. What, will you go on horse-back or on foot[?]

     FAUSTUS. Nay, till I'm past this fair and pleasant green,
     I'll walk on foot.

          Enter a HORSE-COURSER.140

     HORSE-COURSER. I have been all this day seeking one Master Fustian:
     mass, see where he is!—God save you, Master Doctor!

     FAUSTUS. What, horse-courser! you are well met.

     HORSE-COURSER. Do you hear, sir?  I have brought you forty dollars
     for your horse.

     FAUSTUS. I cannot sell him so:  if thou likest him for fifty, take
     him.

     HORSE-COURSER. Alas, sir, I have no more!—I pray you, speak for
     me.

     MEPHIST. I pray you, let him have him:  he is an honest fellow,
     and he has a great charge, neither wife nor child.

     FAUSTUS. Well, come, give me your money [HORSE-COURSER gives
     FAUSTUS the money]:  my boy will deliver him to you.  But I must
     tell you one thing before you have him; ride him not into the
     water, at any hand.

     HORSE-COURSER. Why, sir, will he not drink of all waters?

     FAUSTUS. O, yes, he will drink of all waters; but ride him not
     into the water:  ride him over hedge or ditch, or where thou wilt,
     but not into the water.

     HORSE-COURSER. Well, sir.—Now am I made man for ever:  I'll not
     leave my horse for forty:141  if he had but the quality of
     hey-ding-ding, hey-ding-ding, I'd make a brave living on him:
     he has a buttock as slick as an eel [Aside].—Well, God b'wi'ye,
     sir:  your boy will deliver him me:  but, hark you, sir; if my horse
     be sick or ill at ease, if I bring his water to you, you'll tell
     me what it is?

     FAUSTUS. Away, you villain! what, dost think I am a horse-doctor?
          [Exit HORSE-COURSER.]

     What art thou, Faustus, but a man condemn'd to die?
     Thy fatal time doth draw to final end;
     Despair doth drive distrust into142 my thoughts:
     Confound these passions with a quiet sleep:
     Tush, Christ did call the thief upon the Cross;
     Then rest thee, Faustus, quiet in conceit.
          [Sleeps in his chair.]

          Re-enter HORSE-COURSER, all wet, crying.

     HORSE-COURSER. Alas, alas!  Doctor Fustian, quoth a? mass, Doctor
     Lopus143 was never such a doctor:  has given me a purgation, has
     purged me of forty dollars; I shall never see them more.  But yet,
     like an ass as I was, I would not be ruled by him, for he bade me
     I should ride him into no water:  now I, thinking my horse had had
     some rare quality that he would not have had me know of,144 I,
     like a venturous youth, rid him into the deep pond at the town's
     end.  I was no sooner in the middle of the pond, but my horse
     vanished away, and I sat upon a bottle of hay, never so near
     drowning in my life.  But I'll seek out my doctor, and have my
     forty dollars again, or I'll make it the dearest horse!—O,
     yonder is his snipper-snapper.—Do you hear? you, hey-pass,145
     where's your master?

     MEPHIST. Why, sir, what would you? you cannot speak with him.

     HORSE-COURSER. But I will speak with him.

     MEPHIST. Why, he's fast asleep:  come some other time.

     HORSE-COURSER. I'll speak with him now, or I'll break his
     glass-windows about his ears.

     MEPHIST. I tell thee, he has not slept this eight nights.

     HORSE-COURSER. An he have not slept this eight weeks, I'll
     speak with him.

     MEPHIST. See, where he is, fast asleep.

     HORSE-COURSER. Ay, this is he.—God save you, Master Doctor,
     Master Doctor, Master Doctor Fustian! forty dollars, forty dollars
     for a bottle of hay!

     MEPHIST. Why, thou seest he hears thee not.

     HORSE-COURSER. So-ho, ho! so-ho, ho!  [Hollows in his ear.]  No,
     will you not wake?  I'll make you wake ere I go.  [Pulls FAUSTUS
     by the leg, and pulls it away.]  Alas, I am undone! what shall
     I do?

     FAUSTUS. O, my leg, my leg!—Help, Mephistophilis! call the
     officers.—My leg, my leg!

     MEPHIST. Come, villain, to the constable.

     HORSE-COURSER. O Lord, sir, let me go, and I'll give you forty
     dollars more!

     MEPHIST. Where be they?

     HORSE-COURSER. I have none about me:  come to my ostry,146
     and I'll give them you.

     MEPHIST. Be gone quickly.
          [HORSE-COURSER runs away.]

     FAUSTUS. What, is he gone? farewell he!  Faustus has his leg again,
     and the Horse-courser, I take it, a bottle of hay for his labour:
     well, this trick shall cost him forty dollars more.

          Enter WAGNER.

     How now, Wagner! what's the news with thee?

     WAGNER. Sir, the Duke of Vanholt doth earnestly entreat your
     company.

     FAUSTUS. The Duke of Vanholt! an honourable gentleman, to whom
     I must be no niggard of my cunning.147—Come, Mephistophilis,
     let's away to him.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter the DUKE OF VANHOLT, the DUCHESS, and FAUSTUS.148

     DUKE. Believe me, Master Doctor, this merriment hath much pleased
     me.

     FAUSTUS. My gracious lord, I am glad it contents you so well.
     —But it may be, madam, you take no delight in this.  I have heard
     that great-bellied women do long for some dainties or other:  what
     is it, madam? tell me, and you shall have it.

     DUCHESS. Thanks, good Master Doctor:  and, for I see your courteous
     intent to pleasure me, I will not hide from you the thing my heart
     desires; and, were it now summer, as it is January and the dead
     time of the winter, I would desire no better meat than a dish
     of ripe grapes.

     FAUSTUS. Alas, madam, that's nothing!—Mephistophilis, be gone.
     [Exit MEPHISTOPHILIS.] Were it a greater thing than this, so it
     would content you, you should have it.

          Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS with grapes.

     Here they be, madam:  wilt please you taste on them?

     DUKE. Believe me, Master Doctor, this makes me wonder above the
     rest, that being in the dead time of winter and in the month of
     January, how you should come by these grapes.

     FAUSTUS. If it like your grace, the year is divided into two
     circles over the whole world, that, when it is here winter with
     us, in the contrary circle it is summer with them, as in India,
     Saba,149 and farther countries in the east; and by means of a
     swift spirit that I have, I had them brought hither, as you see.
     —How do you like them, madam? be they good?

     DUCHESS. Believe me, Master Doctor, they be the best grapes that
     e'er I tasted in my life before.

     FAUSTUS. I am glad they content you so, madam.

     DUKE. Come, madam, let us in, where you must well reward this
     learned man for the great kindness he hath shewed to you.

     DUCHESS. And so I will, my lord; and, whilst I live, rest
     beholding150 for this courtesy.

     FAUSTUS. I humbly thank your grace.

     DUKE. Come, Master Doctor, follow us, and receive your reward.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter WAGNER.151

     WAGNER. I think my master means to die shortly,
     For he hath given to me all his goods:152
     And yet, methinks, if that death were near,
     He would not banquet, and carouse, and swill
     Amongst the students, as even now he doth,
     Who are at supper with such belly-cheer
     As Wagner ne'er beheld in all his life.
     See, where they come! belike the feast is ended.
          [Exit.]

          Enter FAUSTUS with two or three SCHOLARS, and MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Master Doctor Faustus, since our conference about
     fair ladies, which was the beautifulest in all the world, we have
     determined with ourselves that Helen of Greece was the admirablest
     lady that ever lived:  therefore, Master Doctor, if you will do us
     that favour, as to let us see that peerless dame of Greece, whom
     all the world admires for majesty, we should think ourselves much
     beholding unto you.

     FAUSTUS. Gentlemen,
     For that I know your friendship is unfeign'd,
     And Faustus' custom is not to deny
     The just requests of those that wish him well,
     You shall behold that peerless dame of Greece,
     No otherways for pomp and majesty
     Than when Sir Paris cross'd the seas with her,
     And brought the spoils to rich Dardania.
     Be silent, then, for danger is in words.
          [Music sounds, and HELEN passeth over the stage.] 153

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Too simple is my wit to tell her praise,
     Whom all the world admires for majesty.

     THIRD SCHOLAR. No marvel though the angry Greeks pursu'd
     With ten years' war the rape of such a queen,
     Whose heavenly beauty passeth all compare.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Since we have seen the pride of Nature's works,
     And only paragon of excellence,
     Let us depart; and for this glorious deed
     Happy and blest be Faustus evermore!

     FAUSTUS. Gentlemen, farewell:  the same I wish to you.
          [Exeunt SCHOLARS.]

          Enter an OLD MAN.154

     OLD MAN. Ah, Doctor Faustus, that I might prevail
     To guide thy steps unto the way of life,
     By which sweet path thou mayst attain the goal
     That shall conduct thee to celestial rest!
     Break heart, drop blood, and mingle it with tears,
     Tears falling from repentant heaviness
     Of thy most vile155 and loathsome filthiness,
     The stench whereof corrupts the inward soul
     With such flagitious crimes of heinous sin156
     As no commiseration may expel,
     But mercy, Faustus, of thy Saviour sweet,
     Whose blood alone must wash away thy guilt.

     FAUSTUS. Where art thou, Faustus? wretch, what hast thou done?
     Damn'd art thou, Faustus, damn'd; despair and die!
     Hell calls for right, and with a roaring voice
     Says, "Faustus, come; thine hour is almost157 come;"
     And Faustus now158 will come to do thee right.
          [MEPHISTOPHILIS gives him a dagger.]

     OLD MAN. Ah, stay, good Faustus, stay thy desperate steps!
     I see an angel hovers o'er thy head,
     And, with a vial full of precious grace,
     Offers to pour the same into thy soul:
     Then call for mercy, and avoid despair.

     FAUSTUS. Ah, my sweet friend, I feel
     Thy words to comfort my distressed soul!
     Leave me a while to ponder on my sins.

     OLD MAN. I go, sweet Faustus; but with heavy cheer,
     Fearing the ruin of thy hopeless soul.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. Accursed Faustus, where is mercy now?
     I do repent; and yet I do despair:
     Hell strives with grace for conquest in my breast:
     What shall I do to shun the snares of death?

     MEPHIST. Thou traitor, Faustus, I arrest thy soul
     For disobedience to my sovereign lord:
     Revolt, or I'll in piece-meal tear thy flesh.

     FAUSTUS. Sweet Mephistophilis, entreat thy lord
     To pardon my unjust presumption,
     And with my blood again I will confirm
     My former vow I made to Lucifer.

     MEPHIST. Do it, then, quickly,159 with unfeigned heart,
     Lest greater danger do attend thy drift.

     FAUSTUS. Torment, sweet friend, that base and crooked age,
     That durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer,
     With greatest torments that our hell affords.

     MEPHIST. His faith is great; I cannot touch his soul;
     But what I may afflict his body with
     I will attempt, which is but little worth.

     FAUSTUS. One thing, good servant,160 let me crave of thee,
     To glut the longing of my heart's desire,—
     That I might have unto my paramour
     That heavenly Helen which I saw of late,
     Whose sweet embracings may extinguish clean
     Those161 thoughts that do dissuade me from my vow,
     And keep mine oath I made to Lucifer.

     MEPHIST. Faustus, this,162 or what else thou shalt desire,
     Shall be perform'd in twinkling of an eye.

          Re-enter HELEN.

     FAUSTUS. Was this the face that launch'd a thousand ships,
     And burnt the topless163 towers of Ilium—
     Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.—
          [Kisses her.]
     Her lips suck forth my soul:  see, where it flies!—
     Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again.
     Here will I dwell, for heaven is164 in these lips,
     And all is dross that is not Helena.
     I will be Paris, and for love of thee,
     Instead of Troy, shall Wertenberg be sack'd;
     And I will combat with weak Menelaus,
     And wear thy colours on my plumed crest;
     Yea, I will wound Achilles in the heel,
     And then return to Helen for a kiss.
     O, thou art fairer than the evening air
     Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars;
     Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter
     When he appear'd to hapless Semele;
     More lovely than the monarch of the sky
     In wanton Arethusa's azur'd arms;
     And none but thou shalt165 be my paramour!
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter the OLD MAN.166

     OLD MAN. Accursed Faustus, miserable man,
     That from thy soul exclud'st the grace of heaven,
     And fly'st the throne of his tribunal-seat!

          Enter DEVILS.

     Satan begins to sift me with his pride:
     As in this furnace God shall try my faith,
     My faith, vile hell, shall triumph over thee.
     Ambitious fiends, see how the heavens smile
     At your repulse, and laugh your state to scorn!
     Hence, hell! for hence I fly unto my God.
          [Exeunt,—on one side, DEVILS, on the other, OLD MAN.]

          Enter FAUSTUS,167 with SCHOLARS.

     FAUSTUS. Ah, gentlemen!

     FIRST SCHOLAR. What ails Faustus?

     FAUSTUS. Ah, my sweet chamber-fellow, had I lived with thee,
     then had I lived still! but now I die eternally.  Look, comes
     he not? comes he not?

     SECOND SCHOLAR. What means Faustus?

     THIRD SCHOLAR. Belike he is grown into some sickness by being
     over-solitary.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. If it be so, we'll have physicians to cure him.
     —'Tis but a surfeit; never fear, man.

     FAUSTUS. A surfeit of deadly sin, that hath damned both body
     and soul.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Yet, Faustus, look up to heaven; remember God's
     mercies are infinite.

     FAUSTUS. But Faustus' offence can ne'er be pardoned:  the serpent
     that tempted Eve may be saved, but not Faustus.  Ah, gentlemen,
     hear me with patience, and tremble not at my speeches!  Though
     my heart pants and quivers to remember that I have been a student
     here these thirty years, O, would I had never seen Wertenberg,
     never read book! and what wonders I have done, all Germany can
     witness, yea, all the world; for which Faustus hath lost both
     Germany and the world, yea, heaven itself, heaven, the seat of
     God, the throne of the blessed, the kingdom of joy; and must
     remain in hell for ever, hell, ah, hell, for ever!  Sweet friends,
     what shall become of Faustus, being in hell for ever?

     THIRD SCHOLAR. Yet, Faustus, call on God.

     FAUSTUS. On God, whom Faustus hath abjured! on God, whom Faustus
     hath blasphemed!  Ah, my God, I would weep! but the devil draws in
     my tears.  Gush forth blood, instead of tears! yea, life and soul!
     O, he stays my tongue!  I would lift up my hands; but see, they
     hold them, they hold them!

     ALL. Who, Faustus?

     FAUSTUS. Lucifer and Mephistophilis.  Ah, gentlemen, I gave them
     my soul for my cunning!168

     ALL. God forbid!

     FAUSTUS. God forbade it, indeed; but Faustus hath done it:  for
     vain pleasure of twenty-four years hath Faustus lost eternal joy
     and felicity.  I writ them a bill with mine own blood:  the date
     is expired; the time will come, and he will fetch me.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Why did not Faustus tell us of this before,169
     that divines might have prayed for thee?

     FAUSTUS. Oft have I thought to have done so; but the devil
     threatened to tear me in pieces, if I named God, to fetch both
     body and soul, if I once gave ear to divinity:  and now 'tis too
     late.  Gentlemen, away, lest you perish with me.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. O, what shall we do to save170 Faustus?

     FAUSTUS. Talk not of me, but save yourselves, and depart.

     THIRD SCHOLAR. God will strengthen me; I will stay with Faustus.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Tempt not God, sweet friend; but let us into the
     next room, and there pray for him.

     FAUSTUS. Ay, pray for me, pray for me; and what noise soever
     ye hear,171 come not unto me, for nothing can rescue me.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Pray thou, and we will pray that God may have
     mercy upon thee.

     FAUSTUS. Gentlemen, farewell:  if I live till morning, I'll visit
     you; if not, Faustus is gone to hell.

     ALL. Faustus, farewell.
          [Exeunt SCHOLARS.—The clock strikes eleven.]

     FAUSTUS. Ah, Faustus,
     Now hast thou but one bare hour to live,
     And then thou must be damn'd perpetually!
     Stand still, you ever-moving spheres of heaven,
     That time may cease, and midnight never come;
     Fair Nature's eye, rise, rise again, and make
     Perpetual day; or let this hour be but
     A year, a month, a week, a natural day,
     That Faustus may repent and save his soul!
     O lente,172 lente currite, noctis equi!
     The stars move still, time runs, the clock will strike,
     The devil will come, and Faustus must be damn'd.
     O, I'll leap up to my God!—Who pulls me down?—
     See, see, where Christ's blood streams in the firmament!
     One drop would save my soul, half a drop:  ah, my Christ!—
     Ah, rend not my heart for naming of my Christ!
     Yet will I call on him:  O, spare me, Lucifer!—
     Where is it now? 'tis gone:  and see, where God
     Stretcheth out his arm, and bends his ireful brows!
     Mountains and hills, come, come, and fall on me,
     And hide me from the heavy wrath of God!
     No, no!
     Then will I headlong run into the earth:
     Earth, gape!  O, no, it will not harbour me!
     You stars that reign'd at my nativity,
     Whose influence hath allotted death and hell,
     Now draw up Faustus, like a foggy mist.
     Into the entrails of yon labouring cloud[s],
     That, when you173 vomit forth into the air,
     My limbs may issue from your smoky mouths,
     So that my soul may but ascend to heaven!
          [The clock strikes the half-hour.]
     Ah, half the hour is past! 'twill all be past anon
     O God,
     If thou wilt not have mercy on my soul,
     Yet for Christ's sake, whose blood hath ransom'd me,
     Impose some end to my incessant pain;
     Let Faustus live in hell a thousand years,
     A hundred thousand, and at last be sav'd!
     O, no end is limited to damned souls!
     Why wert thou not a creature wanting soul?
     Or why is this immortal that thou hast?
     Ah, Pythagoras' metempsychosis, were that true,
     This soul should fly from me, and I be chang'd
     Unto some brutish beast!174 all beasts are happy,
     For, when they die,
     Their souls are soon dissolv'd in elements;
     But mine must live still to be plagu'd in hell.
     Curs'd be the parents that engender'd me!
     No, Faustus, curse thyself, curse Lucifer
     That hath depriv'd thee of the joys of heaven.
          [The clock strikes twelve.]
     O, it strikes, it strikes!  Now, body, turn to air,
     Or Lucifer will bear thee quick to hell!
          [Thunder and lightning.]
     O soul, be chang'd into little water-drops,
     And fall into the ocean, ne'er be found!

          Enter DEVILS.

     My God, my god, look not so fierce on me!
     Adders and serpents, let me breathe a while!
     Ugly hell, gape not! come not, Lucifer!
     I'll burn my books!—Ah, Mephistophilis!
          [Exeunt DEVILS with FAUSTUS.]  175

          Enter CHORUS.

     CHORUS. Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight,
     And burned is Apollo's laurel-bough,
     That sometime grew within this learned man.
     Faustus is gone:  regard his hellish fall,
     Whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise,
     Only to wonder at unlawful things,
     Whose deepness doth entice such forward wits
     To practice more than heavenly power permits.
          [Exit.]
