Come hither, shepherd swain!
 Sir, what do you require?
 I pray thee show to me thy name;
 My name is Fond Desire.
 
When wert thou born, Desire?
 In pride and pomp of May.
 By whom, sweet boy, wert thou begot?
 By fond conceit men say.
 
Tell me who was thy nurse?
 Fresh youth, in sugar’d joy.
 What was thy meat and daily food?
 Sad sighs and great annoy.
 
What had’st thou then to drink?
 Unfeigned lover’s tears.
 What cradle wert thou rocked in?
 In hope devoid of fears.
 
What lulled thee to thy sleep
 Sweet thoughts that liked one best.
 And where is now thy dwelling place?
 In gentle hearts I rest.
 
Doth company displease?
 It doth in many one.
 Where would Desire then choose to be?
 He loves to muse alone.
 
What feedeth most thy sight?
 To gaze on beauty still.
 Whom find’st thou most thy foe?
 Disdain of my good will.
 
Will ever age or death
 Bring thee unto decay?
 No, no, Desire both lives and dies
 A thousand times a day.
 
Then, Fond Desire, farewell;
 Thou art no mate for me;
 I should be loath, methinks, to dwell
 With such a one as thee.

My mind to me a kingdom is; Such perfect joy therein I find That it excels all other bliss That world affords or grows by kind. Though much I want which most men have, Yet still my mind forbids to crave.

No princely pomp, no wealthy store, No force to win the victory, No wily wit to salve a sore, No shape to feed each gazing eye; To none of these I yield as thrall. For why my mind doth serve for all.

I see how plenty suffers oft, How hasty climbers soon do fall; I see that those that are aloft Mishap doth threaten most of all; They get with toil, they keep with fear. Such cares my mind could never bear.

Content I live, this is my stay; I seek no more than may suffice; I press to bear no haughty sway; Look what I lack my mind supplies; Lo, thus I triumph like a king, Content with that my mind doth bring.

I little have, and seek no more. They are but poor, though much they have, And I am rich with little store. They poor, I rich; they beg, I give; They lack, I leave, they pine, I live.

I laugh not at another's loss; I grudge not at another's gain: No worldly waves my mind can toss; My state at one doth still remain. I fear no foe, nor fawning friend; I loathe not life, nor dread my end.

Some weigh their pleasure by their lust, Their wisdom by their rage of will, Their treasure is their only trust; And cloaked craft their store of skill. But all the pleasure that I find Is to maintain a quiet mind.

My wealth is health and perfect ease; My conscience clear my chief defense; I neither seek by bribes to please, Nor by deceit to breed offense. Thus do I live; thus will I die. Would all did so as well as I!

Sitting alone upon my thought in melancholy mood,
In sight of sea, and at my back an ancient hoary wood,
I saw a fair young lady come, her secret fears to wail,
Clad all in colour of a nun, and covered with a veil;
Yet (for the day was calm and clear) I might discern her face,
As one might see a damask rose hid under crystal glass.

Three times, with her soft hand, full hard on her left side she knocks,
And sigh'd so sore as might have mov'd some pity in the rocks;
From sighs and shedding amber tears into sweet song she brake,
When thus the echo answered her to every word she spake:

"Oh heavens! who was the first that bred in me this fever?
  Vere
Who was the first that gave the wound whose fear I wear for ever?
  Vere.
What tyrant, Cupid, to my harm usurps thy golden quiver?
  Vere.
What sight first caught this heart and can from bondage it deliver?
  Vere.

Yet who doth most adore this sight, oh hollow caves tell true?
  You.
What nymph deserves his liking best, yet doth in sorrow rue?
  You.
What makes him not reward good will with some reward or ruth?
  Youth.
What makes him show besides his birth, such pride and such untruth?
  Youth.

May I his favour match with love, if he my love will try?
  Ay.
May I requite his birth with faith ? Then faithful will I die?
  Ay."

And I, that knew this lady well,
Said, Lord how great a miracle,
To her how Echo told the truth,
As true as Phoebus' oracle.
  Vavasour

The labouring man that tills the fertile soil,
And reaps the harvest fruit, hath not indeed
The gain, but pain; and if for all his toil
He gets the straw, the lord will have the seed.

The manchet fine falls not unto his share;
On coarsest cheat his hungry stomach feeds.
The landlord doth possess the finest fare;
He pulls the flowers, he plucks but weeds.

The mason poor that builds the lordly halls,
Dwells not in them; they are for high degree;
His cottage is compact in paper walls,
And not with brick or stone, as others be.

The idle drone that labours not at all,
Sucks up the sweet of honey from the bee;
Who worketh most to their share least doth fall,
With due desert reward will never be.

The swiftest hare unto the mastiff slow
Oft-times doth fall, to him as for a prey;
The greyhound thereby doth miss his game we know
For which he made such speedy haste away.

So he that takes the pain to pen the book,
Reaps not the gifts of goodly golden muse;
But those gain that, who on the work shall look,
And from the sour the sweet by skill doth choose,

For he that beats the bush the bird not gets,
But who sits still and holdeth fast the nets.

What cunning can express
 The favour of her face?
 To whom in this distress,
 I do appeal for grace.
 A thousand Cupids fly
 About her gentle eye.
 
From which each throws a dart,
 That kindleth soft sweet fire:
 Within my sighing heart,
 Possessed by Desire.
 No sweeter life I try,
 Than in her love to die.
 
The lily in the field,
 That glories in his white,
 For pureness now must yield,
 And render up his right;
 Heaven pictured in her face,
 Doth promise joy and grace.
 
Fair Cynthia’s silver light,
 That beats on running streams,
 Compares not with her white,
 Whose hairs are all sun-beams;
 So bright my Nymph doth shine,
 As day unto my eyne.
 
With this there is a red,
 Exceeds the Damask-Rose;
 Which in her cheeks is spread,
 Whence every favour grows.
 In sky there is no star,
 But she surmounts it far.
 
When Phoebus from the bed
 Of Thetis doth arise,
 The morning blushing red,
 In fair carnation wise;
 He shows in my Nymph’s face,
 As Queen of every grace.
 
This pleasant lily white,
 This taint of roseate red;
 This Cynthia’s silver light,
 This sweet fair Dea spread;
 These sunbeams in mine eye,
 These beauties make me die

Who taught thee first to sigh, alas, my heart?
Who taught thy tongue the woeful words of plaint?
Who filled your eyes with tears of bitter smart?
Who gave thee grief and made thy joys to faint?
Who first did paint with colours pale thy face?
Who first did break thy sleeps of quiet rest?
Above the rest in court who gave thee grace?
Who made thee strive in honour to be best?
In constant truth to bide so firm and sure,
To scorn the world regarding but thy friends?
With patient mind each passion to endure,
In one desire to settle to the end?
Love then thy choice wherein such choice thou bind,
As nought but death may ever change thy mind.
